
1

2

3
Table of Contents
1. Preface
2. Module 3 Exploring and Producing Data for Business Decision Making
1. Lesson 3-1 Producing Data
1. Lesson 3-1.1 Producing Data
2. Lesson 3-2 Sampling
1. Lesson 3-2.1 Sampling
2. Lesson 3-2.2 Sampling Function in Excel
3. Lesson 3-3 Central Limit Theorem and Sampling Means
1. Lesson 3-3.1 Central Limit Theorem and Sampling Means
2. Lesson 3-3.2 Animating the Central Limit Theorem
3. Lesson 3-3.3 Sampling Distribution and Empirical Rule in Excel
4. Lesson 3-4 Central Limit Theorem – Sampling Population
1. Lesson 3-4.1 Central Limit Theorem – Sampling Proportion

4
Preface
Thank you for choosing a Gies eBook.
This Gies eBook is based on an extended video lecture transcript made from Module 3 of
Professor Fataneh Taghaboni-Dutta’s Exploring and Producing Data for Business Decision
Making on Coursera. The Gies eBook provides a reading experience that covers all of the
information in the MOOC videos in a fully accessible format. The Gies eBook can be used with
any standards-based e-reading software supporting the ePUB 3.0 format.
Each Gies eBook is broken down by lessons that are navigable using our e-reader’s table of
contents feature. Within each lesson the following sequence of content will always occur:
Lesson title
A link to the web-based videos for each lesson (You must be online to view.)
Within the lesson, every time there is a slide change or a switch to the next informative video
scene, you will be presented with:
Thumbnail image of the current slide or video scene
Any text present on the slide in the video is recreated below the thumbnail in a searchable,
screen reader-ready format.
Extended text description of the important visuals such as graphs and charts presented in
the slides.
Any tabular data from the video is recreated and properly labeled for screen reader
navigation and reading.
All math equations are presented in MathML that provides both content and presentation if
on screen.
Transcript that captures all of the original speech in the video labeled by the person
speaking.
All Gies eBooks are designed with accessibility and usability as a priority. This design is intended
to serve all readers in a flexible manner regardless of their choice of digital reading tools.
If you have any questions or suggestions for improvement for this Gies eBook, please contact
Giesbooks@illinois.edu

5
Copyright © 2019 by Fataneh Taghaboni-Dutta
All rights reserved.
Published by the Gies College of Business at the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, and
the Board of Trustees of the University of Illinois

6
Module 3 Exploring and Producing Data for
Business Decision Making

7
Lesson 3-1 Producing Data
Lesson 3-1.1 Producing Data
Media Player for Video 
Where Does the Data Come From? - Slide 1
Existing Sources: Data already gathered by public or private sources
US government and world organizations
Internet
Library
Data collection agency
Transcript
We need to have data once we determine what we are interested in knowing. We got to this point
by first having defined some random variables that we like to get an understanding on, such as
average amount an American spends on entertainment or average age of a person pursuing
online education and etcetera. So, next is to go and find a data. So, where does the data come
from? There are many existing sources that already have vast amount of data. Some examples
are electronic versions of government publications, company reports and business journals. But
there is also a wealth of information available in reference sections of a good library or in a
county courthouse records.
Another alternative would be to contact a data collection agency, which typically incurs some kind
of a cost. You can either buy subscriptions or purchase individual company financial reports from

8
agencies like Bloomberg, Dow Jones and Company, Travel Industry of America, Graduate
Management Admission Council and Educational Testing Services, just to name a few. However,
there are times that the data we need doesn't exist. In such cases, we have to conduct some type
of a study so that we can get the data.
Step One in Initiating a Study - Slide 2
Response Variable: Define the variable of interest, called a response variable. For example,
Worker productivity
Transcript
So, now let's look at what we need to do in order to conduct the study. When initiating study, we
first define our variable of interest or response variable. Again, we are learning new vocabulary
here and it's important for you to know these. For one, you will come across these terms in
reports and meetings and you should not be at a loss about what they are implying. Let me give
you an example. Imagine that you are interested in knowing how efficient our employees are in
doing their tasks. So, we can define our variable interests as worker productivity. Let's say, we will
measure this as a number of customers served per hour. We believe that the worker productivity
responds to several factors, thus it's a response variable.

9
Step Two in Initiating a Study - Slide 3
Independent Variables: Define other variables that may be related to the variable of interest and
will be measured, called independent variables
Amount of training
Reliability of equipment
Number of years at this job
Transcript
Once you know the variables interests, now you need to determine what factors will influence this
variable. These factors are also known as the independent variables. Let's continue with our
example of measuring worker productivity. Factors that may influence one's productivity could be
amount of training the workers have received, reliability of equipment that they use, the number
of years at this job and etcetera. So, in this study, these would be the independent variables,
factors which influence the response variable – worker productivity.

10
Let's Practice - Slide 4
Impact of hours of studying on grade
A group of incoming freshman are asked to keep track of hours of studying they do per week,
and we will track their GPA for the next four years.
Transcript
Now, let's practice. Does the number of hours spent on studying impacts a student's GPA? To
study this, we design an experiment in which we select a group of incoming freshmen, these are
first year students, and ask them to keep track of hours of studying they do per week and we will
track their GPA for the next four years. What is the variable of interest and what is the
independent variable?

11
Let's Practice - Solved - Slide 5
Impact of hours of studying on grade
A group of incoming freshman are asked to keep track of hours of studying they do per week,
and we will track their GPA for the next four years.
Variable of interest is the students' GPA
Independent variable is hours spent on studying.
Transcript
We are interested in measuring the impact of hours spent studying on GPA. So, the variable of
interest is GPA, which we believe responds to the independent variable hours spent on studying.

12
Type of Study (1 of 2) - Slide 6
Experimental Study: Independent variables can be manipulated.
Impact of fertilization on plant yield
Response variable: Plant yield
Independent variable: Amount of fertilizer used
Transcript
So, now that we know our variable interest and have identified some independent variables, we
can go on with conducting the study. Depending on what you're trying to do, you may be doing a
study, which is known as an experimental study. An experimental study is one, in which you go
and manipulate the independent variable. For instance, we want to measure the impact of a
particular fertilizer and plant yield. Here, the variable of interest, our response variable is plant
yield. And the independent variable is the amount of fertilizer used. For different plots of land, we
can manipulate how much fertilizer is given and then measure the yield at harvest time, since in
this study we can manipulate the independent variable. In this case, fertilizer amount applied.
Then we are doing an experimental study. Of course, for the sake of simplicity in this example,
I'm assuming that all other factors, such as soil conditions, water and etcetera are being held
equal. Of course, one of the major issues in determining the quality of a study is how well and
completely the researchers have identified the independent factors. Failing to do so could result
in a wrong or incomplete understanding.

13
Type of Study (2 of 2) - Slide 7
Observational Study: Unable to control independent variables
How do children develop their language skills?
Number of words by age one (response variable)
Number words spoken to the child (independent variable)
Transcript
There are many times that we can't or it's simply unethical for us to control the independent
variable. When that is the case, we were conducting an observational study. The question of how
children develop their language has always interested researchers. In such a study, one possible
variables interest could be measuring the number of words a baby knows by age one. However, if
we believe that factors such as amount of spoken words to a baby in the first year has an
influence on the baby's speech development, it would be unethical for us to control this factor by
let's say asking some parents to not speak to their child at all for the entire year and then ask
another set of parents to speak to their child for 18 hours per day in the first year so we can
determine the impact of being spoken to in a speech development of their babies. Studies such
as this is only conducted as an observational study, where the participants will simply self-report
how much they spoke to their babies and how many words the baby could speak by age one.

14
Data Collection Time Frame (1 of 2) - Slide 8
Cross-Sectional Data: Data collected at the same or approximately same point in time
Transcript
Once you have identified the response variable and independent variable, now you can start
collecting the data. Here again, you have more than one choice. Cross sectional data are data
collected at the same or approximately same point in time. Suppose that a bank, which pays for
the employee's cell phone usage, wishes to analyze last month's cell phone bills for its
employees. The bank decides to look at month of May cell phone bills of its employees. Looking
at different bills for the same month will provide a cross sectional data. Your data collection is
considered a time series data if you're collecting data over different time periods.

15
Data Collection Time Frame (2 of 2) - Slide 9
Time-Series Data: Data collected over different time periods
Transcript
A famous study known as the Nurses Study is a great example for a time series data. The study
was initiated in 1976 and then expanded in 1989 to study women's health and this study collected
health related data on over 200,000 nurses over time to understand impact of various factors on
women's health issues. This was an observational study, which means the nurses live their lives
without interference from the researchers and every so often answered questions about their
health, did some medical tests and the data was collected over many years for analysis.
Let's Practice - Slide 10

16
Impact of hours of studying on grade
A group of incoming freshman are asked to keep track of hours of studying they do per week,
and we will track their GPA for the next four years.
Variable of interest is the students' GPA.
Independent variable is hours spent on studying.
Transcript
So, now let's practice. Going back to this earlier study about impact of studying on GPA. This
study – we design an experiment in which we selected a group of incoming freshmen and asked
them to keep track of hours of studying they do per week and retract their GPA for the next four
years. Is this an observational study or experimental study? What about the data? Is it time series
or cross sectional?
Let's Practice - Solved - Slide 11
Impact of hours of studying on grade
A group of incoming freshman are asked to keep track of hours of studying they do per week,
and we will track their GPA for the next four years.
Transcript
We have asked the students to record their study habits without manipulating it, so it's an
observational study and the data is collected over four years of college, so it is time series.

17
Let's Practice - Slide 12
Impact of beer on obesity
To examine the relationship between beer intake and waist-hip ration (WHR) and body mass
index (BMI), researchers conducted a study on a random sample of 1,141 men and 1,212 women
aged 25–64. The subjects completed a questionnaire and underwent a short examination in a
clinic. Intake of beer, wine, and spirits during a typical week, frequency of drinking, and a number
of other factors were measured by a questionnaire.
Transcript
A study done by researcher to investigate the impact of drinking beer on weight. The study was
conducted on a sample taken from six districts of Czech Republic. This is, by the way, a real
study. In this study, a random sample of 1,141 men and 1,212 women ages 25 to 64 completed a
questionnaire and underwent a short examination in a clinic. Intake of beer, wine and spirit during
a week, frequency of drinking and the number of other factors were measured by a
questionnaire. What kind of a study is this? How was the data collected?

18
Let's Practice - Solved - Slide 13
Impact of beer on obesity
To examine the relationship between beer intake and waist-hip ration (WHR) and body mass
index (BMI), researchers conducted a study on a random sample of 1,141 men and 1,212 women
aged 25–64. The subjects completed a questionnaire and underwent a short examination in a
clinic. Intake of beer, wine, and spirits during a typical week, frequency of drinking, and a number
of other factors were measured by a questionnaire.
Transcript
This is again an observational data. Data is collected over the same time period for all subject,
thus it's a cross sectional data.

19
Big Data - Slide 14
Massive volume of both structured and unstructured data
Transcript
We can't finish this lesson without at least mentioning big data. This is a term that has taken hold
in today's business world and we can do a lot of statistical analysis on big data. But what is big
data? You have big data when you have access to massive volumes of both structured and
unstructured data. We have a lot of data available today. Companies are collecting data through
every means possible: GPS devices, your smart phones, your credit cards, your health tracking
devices, your game console, just to name a few. The availability of big data opens up an extra
opportunity to answer compelling questions, such as can you tell someone is about to have a
heart attack before they show any symptoms? Can you tell if someone is going to default on their
loan before issuing them that loan? The ability to make sense of these massive data is yet
another way that we can find data, which can be used for gaining and understanding about our
variable of interest. All of the analyses done in the statistics starts with a subset of population of
interest known as sample. So, once we know what data we need, we must create the sample. In
the next lesson, we will discuss how to create such sample.
Academic Citation: Bobak, M., Skodove, Z., and Marmot, M. (2003). Beer and obesity: A cross-
sectional study. European Journal of Clinical Nutrition, 57(10). Retrieved from
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/14506485.

20
Lesson 3-2 Sampling
Lesson 3-2.1 Sampling
Media Player for Video 
Sampling - Slide 15
Scientific Study
Scientific Poll
Sampling methods:
1. Non-Probability Methods
2. Probability Methods
Transcript
So far, we have learned how to summarize data and learn about distributions. We have even
talked about having data from a sample. Now it is time to talk about how to produce the data,
which is all about taking samples. Have you ever noticed that sometimes when you're listening to
news programs or reading an article you hear a term such as scientific study, scientific poll,
which, by the way, implies that you can have data that has been produced in a non-scientific way.
Basically, when we take a sample, we are using one of two methods. The first one is by using
one of the non-probability methods, and the second one is using one of the probability methods.
So, let's explore these methods in more detail starting with non-probability methods.

21
Non-Probability Method (1 of 2) - Slide 16
Volunteer Sampling: Individuals have selected themselves to be included.
What is the problem with this?
Bias
Results are not generalizable
Transcript
Volunteer sampling is an example of a non-probability method. In this type of a sample,
individuals have selected themselves to be included. If you leave a review for an item you have
purchased, then you are volunteering to be a part of a customer base who would leave
comments. In the field of statistics, this type of a data is considered as non-scientific. Why? What
is the problem with this? The biggest problem with data gathered this way is what is known as
bias. Such a sample is almost guaranteed to be biased because most often it includes mostly
data on individuals who have a particularly strong opinion about an issue and are looking for a
way to voice this opinion. As a result, data obtained from a voluntary response sample is quite
useless when you think about the big picture since the sampled individuals only provide
information about themselves. Thus, we can't generalize to any larger group at all; however, you
should be aware that in some cases this is the only way we can obtain a sample, clinical trials for
medical treatments as an example. It is unethical to force an individual to participate in a medical
study. Thus, doctors look for individuals who would volunteer; however, in this setting, we use this
type of a volunteer sample so that we can compare the treatments given to this group to other
groups receiving different types of treatment. As it turns out, when comparing several treatments
to each other, volunteering sampling is not as problematic. We will discuss this in more detail in
the second course in this series.

22
Non-Probability Method (2 of 2) - Slide 17
Convenience Sampling: Subjects are selected because of their convenient accessibility.
Transcript
Sometimes the data is gathered by simply being at the right place at the right time. We refer to
this as convenience sampling. For example, news outlets often stand outside of the polling
stations and ask voters who are leaving whom they voted for. Now, each individual may choose
to ignore them or stay back and answer. So, in a way, there is volunteerism here as well. And this
could result in bias; however, based on the variable being collected, it may be that this type of a
sample could provide a fairly representative group. So, bias is the most problematic issue with a
sample.

23
The Problem With Using a Non-Representative
Sample - Bias - Slide 18
1936 Presidential Election
Franklin D. Roosevelt vs Alfred Landon
The Literary Digest predicted defeat for Franklin D. Roosevelt in the 1936 presidential election.
Transcript
Let me share with you an example from an American presidential election. The two opposing
candidates were Franklin D. Roosevelt and Alfred Landon. This was right after the Great
Depression, and economic issues such as unemployment and government spending, were the
dominant theme of the campaign. Roosevelt was in favor of continued government spending on
public works to increase employment, and his opponent, Landon, was more in favor of limiting
these. By and large, Landon was preferred by the more affluent voters rather than the working
class. One of the most respected magazines of the time, the Literary Digest, known for predicting
elections accurately, predicted defeat for Franklin D. Roosevelt. They were wrong. Roosevelt won
in a landslide. Only two states, the two red ones, were won by Landon. So, what went wrong?
Well, it was about how the sampling was done. They selected their sample from a list of
telephone numbers. In 1930s, telephone was a luxury which only the rich could afford; therefore,
their sample was biased and didn't represent the population of the voters accurately. Since the
people who were polled were rich, it gave the impression that Landon would be elected, where in
fact, the exact opposite was true.

24
Representative Sample - Slide 19
A Randomly Selected Sample:
Is representative of the whole population
Produces samples whose averages resemble those in the population (avoids bias)
Enables use to infer characteristics of the population from a sample
Larger populations do not require larger samples.
Transcript
To do data analysis correctly, we must start off with good, unbiased representative samples. The
best way to get a representative sample is to pick a member of the population at random. This
will make it more likely to have a sample which is representative of the whole population, produce
a sample whose averages resemble those in the population and enables us to infer
characteristics of the population from a sample. When you select the sample the right way, then
you don't need to worry about how large is the actual population. That is, larger populations do
not require larger samples. We will learn more about this later on, but this is a great thing. This
means if you want to know something about the Chinese consumer, you don't need to take a
larger sample as compared to a study which is looking at an American consumer just because
China has a larger population than the U.S. So now let's look at a few sampling techniques that
will make this more likely, resulting in a scientific poll or study. These sampling methods all use
probability methods, which gives us the results that can be generalized to the population from
which the sample came from.

25
Probability Sampling Techniques (1 of 3) - Slide 20
Simple Random Sampling: Every member of the population has the same chance of being
selected as another member.
Transcript
One such method is known as simple random sampling, and this is the simplest probability
sampling plan. As the name suggests, it is equivalent of selecting names out of a hat. Each
individual has the same chance of being selected. This is one way of ensuring that the bias is not
present in the selection process. The only way bias comes in play here is associated with the
response of the selected members. Have you ever received a phone call or a mailing asking you
to answer a few questions? If you ignore the request, you're classified as non-response. So, we
still can get some bias if a large group chooses not to respond. Researchers spend a lot of effort
in improving response rate to reduce bias.

26
Probability Sampling Techniques (2 of 3) - Slide 21
Stratified Sampling: Population can naturally be divided into sub-populations (strata).
Example: Female (200) + Male (200) = 400
Transcript
Another probability sampling method is known as stratified sampling. This technique is used
when our population is naturally divided into subgroups, which we call strata. Imagine that we
want to conduct a poll and we would like to make sure that our sample has a fair representation
of both genders, male and females, which means we have two strata based on gender. In
stratified sampling, we choose a simple random sample from each stratum. So, in our study we
will select 200 females from the female strata, 200 males from the male strata, and therefore our
actual sample consists of all these simple random samples put together, which would be 400
people in total.

27
Probability Sampling Techniques (3 of 3) - Slide 22
Cluster Sampling: Population is naturally divided into groups (which we call clusters).
A random number of clusters are selected.
Members of the selected clusters are then included in the sample.
Transcript
Cluster sampling is another probability sampling method. And in this method, we divide the
population into groups called clusters; however, with cluster sampling each cluster is a small-
scale version of the population, therefore is expected to behave like the population. After creating
the clusters, first we select few of these clusters and then we either select all individuals from
these chosen clusters to be sampled or choose some members of the clusters at random. Cluster
sampling is appropriate for populations that are spread out over a large geographical area or in
such a manner that there are differences in each area with respect to the variable of interest. For
example, serving income by neighborhood. We may break up a large city into 15 clusters based
on some characteristics and then select 8 of the 15 clusters to pull the sample from. The biggest
difference between cluster sampling and stratified sampling is that in stratified sampling, we will
draw a random sample from all strata. Where in cluster sampling, we will only pull from some
clusters. Both cluster sampling and strata sampling require little work before we can start drawing
a random sample. This is the time taken to decide how to divide the population up. But at the
end, we can draw smaller sample, which would be a good representative sample as compared to
doing just a simple random sample.

28
Let's Practice - Slide 23
You have a network of fast food restaurants (total of 10), and you want to know if the customers
are satisfied with the quality of food and service. Classify the following sampling techniques one
can use to do the data collection:
1. Every customer receives a phone number with their bill and is encouraged to call with their
comments.
2. We choose three of the restaurants and contact all customers who visited these three
locations within the past week and survey them.
3. We choose 50 customers at random from each of the restaurants and survey them.
4. We select 500 customers at random from a database of past customers and survey them.
Transcript
Let's see if you can determine which type of sampling we have used for the following study. You
have a network of fast food restaurants, total of ten. You want to know if the customers are
satisfied with the quality of food and services. Now, classify the following sampling techniques
which can be used to do the data collection. Every customer receives a phone number with their
bill and is encouraged to call with their comments. We choose three of the restaurants and
contact all customers who visited these three locations within the past week and survey them. We
choose 50 customers at random from each of the restaurants and survey them or we select 500
customers at random from a data base of past customers and survey them.

29
Let's Practice - Solved (1 of 4) - Slide 24
You have a network of fast food restaurants (total of 10), and you want to know if the customers
are satisfied with the quality of food and service. Classify the following sampling techniques one
can use to do the data collection:
1. Every customer receives a phone number with their bill and is encouraged to call with their
comments. Volunteer Sampling
Transcript
Every customer receives a phone number with their bill and is encouraged to call with their
comments. This would be an example of volunteer sampling, and it is non-probability method.
Here you may get a disproportionate number of customers who are very satisfied to call you or
vice versa, giving you the wrong impression. Sometimes it's possible that dissatisfied customers
will not contact you and just won't visit again, not providing the much-needed feedback that
you're doing something wrong and a chance to improve.

30
Let's Practice - Solved (2 of 4) - Slide 25
Suppose you have a network of fast food restaurants (total of 10), and you want to know if the
customers are satisfied with the quality of food and service. Classify the following sampling
techniques one can use to do the data collection:
2. We choose three of the restaurants and contact all customers who visited these three locations
within the past week and survey them. Cluster Sampling
Transcript
Choosing three of the restaurants and contacting all customers who visited these three locations
within the past three weeks and surveying them, is an example of cluster sampling. The entire
customer base is divided into groups, restaurants they visited. We chose three clusters, and then
all customers visiting these three restaurants in the past week were contacted with the survey.

31
Let's Practice - Solved (3 of 4) - Slide 26
Suppose you have a network of fast food restaurants (total of 10), and you want to know if the
customers are satisfied with the quality of food and service. Classify the following sampling
techniques one can use to do the data collection:
3. We choose 50 customers at random from each of the restaurants and survey them. Stratified
Sampling
Transcript
Choosing 50 customers at random from each of the restaurants and surveying them is an
example of stratified sampling. There are ten restaurants, then therefore ten strata, and we have
surveyed customers from each. This way we are sure not to leave out any restaurant that may
have the worst service record or the best service record. We get to have representation from all
ten locations.

32
Let's Practice - Solved (4 of 4) - Slide 27
Suppose you have a network of fast food restaurants (total of 10), and you want to know if the
customers are satisfied with the quality of food and service. Classify the following sampling
techniques one can use to do the data collection:
4. We select 500 customers at random from a database of past customers and survey them.
Simple Random Sample
Transcript
Selecting a random 500 customers from database of past customers and surveying them is an
example of simple random sample where which restaurant the customer has visited has no
bearing on how they are selected for our sample.

33
Sample Size - Slide 28
Large samples are better than small samples.
Transcript
So far, we have made no mention of sample size. Our first priority is to make sure that we have a
sample, which is representative of the population by using some form of a probability sampling
plan. Next, we this keep in mind that in order to get a more precise idea about our population,
then a larger sample does a better job than a smaller one. There is always a cost involved in
collecting a larger sample. Based on our requirement, we can calculate the size of the sample
needed. We will discuss the issues of sample size in more detail later on in this course as well as
in the second course in this series.
In this lesson we learned various techniques by which one can choose a sample of individuals or
data points from an entire population. This is seemly a simple step, but in reality, this is an
extremely crucial step. Without a good sample, good analysis is simply not possible. Generally
speaking, probability sampling method will result in a non-biased sample, which can be safely
used to generalize our findings; however, there are times that our only choice is to use non-
probability sampling technique. It is important, though, when these techniques are used to be
aware of the type of bias that they introduce, and thus the limitations, the conclusions they have
that can be drawn from these resulting samples.
Lesson 3-2.2 Sampling Function in Excel
Media Player for Video 

34
Daily Temperature Excel Sheet (1 of 10) - Slide 29
Excel worksheet for daily temperatures. Five columns shown are day #, date, and temperatures
for airports in Champaign, Chicago, and New York.
Download the Daily Temperature excel file (Refer to Data - First worksheet) 
Transcript
In this video, I'm going to show you how to use the function in data analysis for taking samples
out of your population. So, I have the daily temperatures for three different cities here,
Champaign, Chicago, New York.
Daily Temperature Excel Sheet (2 of 10) - Slide 30

35
Using the command Control + Shift + down arrow, the entire column of numbers to row 26,702 is
captured by Excel.
Transcript
No instruction provided during this slide
Daily Temperature Excel Sheet (3 of 10) - Slide 31
Column of temperatures is selected.
Transcript
I'm going to focus on New York. And if I scroll down using control shift down button, you will see
that I have over 26,000 different days of temperature.

36
Daily Temperature Excel Sheet (4 of 10) - Slide 32
Column of temperatures is selected. Data tab is highlighted and under that Data Analysis is
highlighted.
Transcript
No instruction provided during this slide
Daily Temperature Excel Sheet (5 of 10) - Slide 33
Data Analysis window is displayed and Sampling is highlighted.

37
Transcript
And I want to take a sample of these. So, one way of doing this is going by data, data analysis,
and then scroll down until you find sampling. Click “Okay”.
Daily Temperature Excel Sheet (6 of 10) - Slide 34
Choose Data from the Top line (main) Menu which opens up sub command menu. Select Data
Analysis at far right sub menu. Opens drop down menu. Select Sampling and choose OK. Opens
a Pop up Window. Enter $E$1:$E$26771 (entire New York column). Next row is Labels with
check box. Next row is labeled Sampling Method with two choices: Periodic and Random. Select
Random. Under Random is a row labeled Number of Samples. Enter 130 (or the number you
wish to analyze). Next row is labeled Output Options with three options: Output range, New
Worksheet Ply, and New Worksheet. Select New Worksheet Ply.
Transcript
A pop-up window comes in and it first asks you for your input range. So, I'm going to take a
sample of New York daily temperatures that have been recorded. So, I'm going to put my cursor
on New York and then control shift down. And this will pick the entire data set for me, the entire
26 thousand. You see here, it says E1 to E26,771. Now, I have picked also New York. If I had not,
I could ignore this next step, but since I have picked the name of my city I'm going to click on
labels. That way it knows that the very first cell only is a label and it should not be used. I'm going
to use a random sampling, but I'm going to tell you something about periodic. If I say periodic and
I can put a number here, what it's going to do is that if I say four, it's going to look for every fourth
data set and it will keep on picking those out of my data. But I want to take a random sample. So,
I'm going to click on random. Now, here it says number of samples and this is very confusing,
because in statistics number of samples means how many samples are you trying to take and
what is the size of each sample. Well, here number of samples is actually about the size of the
sample. So, let's say I want to take 130 observations out of this. So, I'm going to say okay after I
wanted to put it in a new worksheet. That's where I'm going to put it. So, I'm going to say okay.

38
Daily Temperature Excel Sheet (7 of 10) - Slide 35
On a new worksheet, Column A list 130 numbers randomly selected by the computer. Inserts row
above first row of data in column A. Types Sample 1 in Column A row 1. Types Sample 2 in
Column B row 1. Captures these two cells and labels each column to Column E row 1.
Transcript
And what you see here is that it ignored my very first data. But if I go down, you will see that I
have exactly 130 different data sets that have been selected. So, this is my sample number one.
So, I if want to do this over and over again, the way I would do it is at first, I'm going to insert a
row here and I'm going to call this my sample number one. So, let's say I want to do this five
times, sample number two. And then, an easy way of doing it is just highlight these two and it
already knows that I am going in a linear fashion and it will put those five things for me.

39
Daily Temperature Excel Sheet (8 of 10) - Slide 36
In the Data Analysis menu, when selecting Output Range under Output options, be sure to be on
the cell next to Output Range. Otherwise, you will overwrite the Input Range you entered.
Selecting the cell next to Output Range and entering Sheet 2 protects your selected Input Range.
Go to Sheet 2 and highlight Column B row 2. It will add $B$2 to the Output Range. Press OK.
Transcript
Now, I need to go back to sheet one and repeat this process five times. So, I go to data analysis
again. Sampling again. I do the same thing. And this one, I'm going to give it an output range,
because I want them to be all next to one another. I'm going to click here. Every time you click on
this, let me just show you. Every time you click on this, this gets highlighted again. And if you're
not paying attention, you're going to overwrite this. So, make sure after you click on this, you
definitely click on this window before you click elsewhere. As you can see, as I clicked on this,
this is no longer highlighted. So, I'm going to go to my sheet two and I say to it that I want you to
put everything starting from her, and it populated it for me. Again, if I look at sample two, I would
see that it has all of the 130 highlighted here. So, I did this five times and I have now five different
sets of data from New York.

40
Daily Temperature Excel Sheet (9 of 10) - Slide 37
Selected numbers now populate Sheet 2 Column B. Worksheet 2 now has five columns of data.
Transcript
Each of the five samples have 130 observations each. The next thing I will do is to find the
average for each of these samples. At the end of the day, we are studying central limit theorem.
And we want to know how sample means will differ from one randomly selected sample to the
next. Eventually, we will look at the distribution of the sampling means and understand how
central limit theorem works.
Daily Temperature Excel Sheet (10 of 10) - Slide 38

41
Using Column G, she creates five rows labeled Sample 1 average, Sample 2 average, etc. In
Column H, next to Sample 1 average she enters equals Average(A2:A131) resulting in
55.97807693. Sample 2: 54.91192308. Sample 3: 58.03353846. Sample 4: 57.76907692.
Sample 5: 55.77107692.
Transcript
So, I start by calculating the average for sample number one. And I will do the same thing for
each of the samples. So, I'm going to record each of the samples right here. So, for this is the
average and I'm going to pick average by tabbing on it. And I will do the same thing as I always
did. So, click on the first cell, control shift down and pick the entire thing. Close the parentheses
and return. And as I scroll up, you will see the average for sample one is 55.97. So, I will repeat
the same thing for the sample two, three, four and five. So, here we are with our five different
samples. All of them taken from the same large data set that we had for New York. Each one of
them had 130 observations. And by the way, they don't have to be equal. In this case, I chose to
have 130 every time I sample. You can choose that number from one sample to the next. And
what I get is that clearly some differences between each sample. So, sample number three, for
example, resulted in the highest value for the average. And sample number two resulted in the
lowest. And then, we have two about 55 and then a 57. So, if you repeat this, let's say 50 or 60 or
100 times, we're going to get that many different samples, and the idea behind central limit
theorem is that we're going to draw this distribution. And I will show that in a later video.

42
Lesson 3-3 Central Limit Theorem and Sampling
Means
Lesson 3-3.1 Central Limit Theorem and Sampling
Means
Media Player for Video 
Central Limit Theorem (CLT) - Slide 39
Central limit theorem as a superhero.
Transcript
Most people who don't understand statistics are very suspicious about what anyone says based
on a relatively small sample. As you know, we don't have the time or the means to study
populations, and we rely on sample study. Suspicious or not, time and time again, if we have an
unbiased and representative sample, our conclusions will be right in the majority of the cases. We
test a drug on a relatively small number of people, and then we decide that the drug is safe and
effective for the entire world. Why does it work? Where does this powerful insight come from?
Most is due to what it is known as the central limit theorem. If we could have one superhero in the
world of statistics, it would be this theorem. To understand this theorem, it is best to go through
an example.

43
The Central Limit Theorem and Means (1 of 8) - Slide
40
How much money does a teenager (ages 13 to 19) spend on going to movies?
Transcript
Movies are made to make profit for the studios. One important group are the teenagers, those
aged between 13 and 19. In order to prioritize the type of movies that the studio makes, we may
first want to know something about this age group. Are they spending money to go see the
movies or do they wait for them to come out in DVD and online, which may not be as profitable?
Or which genre they prefer to see in the movie theater? If we could ask every teenager in the
country, most will fall near the average spending. And the further we get from the average, the
fewer teenagers we find that spend that kind of money. But we can't ask all teenagers. So
instead, to do this study, we select a random sample of teenagers and ask them. Let's assume
that in our first study, we ask a group of teenagers how much they spend on movies in a year.

44
The Central Limit Theorem and Means (2 of 8) - Slide
41
Size of the group (sample size = 25)
Histogram shows dollars along the x-axis from 3,000 to 10,500 and numbers of students on the
y-axis.
Average spent on movies for the group ≈ $728
Transcript
This histogram shows the response from each of the 25 teenagers surveyed. There is a great
range among these 25, but when we take their average as a group, we find the average spending
to be about $728. We know the chosen group may not be representative of the entire population,
so we take many such samples. In this study, we are going to take 99 more groups of 25
teenagers and record each group's average spending on movies. So at the end, we'll end up with
a total of 100 average spending.

45
The Central Limit Theorem and Means (3 of 8) - Slide
42
Size of the group (sample size = 25)
Average spent on movies for the group
Histogram where x-axis is dollars from 3,000 to 9,000 and y-axis is numbers of students from 4 to
34. The histogram is clustered from 6,000 to 7,500.
Transcript
Plotting the average of each group, we find the averages of these groups are somewhat bell-
shaped. This histogram shows the distribution of the sample means.

46
The Central Limit Theorem and Means (4 of 8) - Slide
43
Size of the group (sample size = 50)
Average spent on movies for the group
Histogram is clustered from 6,000 to 7,000.
Transcript
Now, let's see what happens if we take sample size of 50 in each group and survey 100 such
groups.

47
The Central Limit Theorem and Means (5 of 8) - Slide
44
Size of the group (sample size = 100)
Average spent on movies for the group
Histogram is clustered from 6,000 to 6,800.
Transcript
Now let's do the survey including 100 in each group and survey 100 such groups.

48
The Central Limit Theorem and Means (6 of 8) - Slide
45
Size of the group (sample size = 250)
Average spent on movies for the group
Histogram clustered between 6,200 to 6,600.
Transcript
Now do the survey including 250 in each group and survey 100 such groups.

49
The Central Limit Theorem and Means (7 of 8) - Slide
46
All 5 histograms showing that as sample size increases, distribution becomes more normal and
centered around the mean.
Transcript
Did you notice what happened to the distribution of the mean dollars being spent? As the sample
size increased, the spread has decreased and the distribution is becoming more and more evenly
spread around the mean, making it a more classical, normal distribution.
The Central Limit Theorem and Means (8 of 8) - Slide
47

50
The averages of the samples have approximately normal distribution.
As the sample size increases, the distribution of averages becomes more normal as well as
narrower.
Transcript
This is what central theorem gives us, which is the average of samples have approximately
normal distribution. And as a sample size increases, the distribution of averages become both
more normal as well as narrower. Recall, when a distribution is narrower, it has a smaller
standard deviation, and therefore the mean is much more representative of a typical observation.
Would this also be true if we didn't have a population that is normal? Here we had assumed that
the money spent on movies for the population of teenagers are normally distributed. What if this
was not the case?
Non-Normal Populations (1 of 6) - Slide 48
Distribution of daily temperatures for Chicago.
Histogram with an x-axis of temperatures from −15 to 95. Peaks in data between 30 to 35 and 70
to 75.
Transcript
Here's the distribution of average daily temperatures for the city of Chicago collected over many,
many years. This distribution is bimodal, and the two peaks represent the most observed
temperature during the cold months and the warmer months. What would the sampling
distribution of sample means look like for such a distribution? So, let's do the same. To give an
estimate for average temperature of Chicago, we will take several samples, 100 samples, with
sample sizes of 5, then 25, and finally 100. Let's see how this will turn out.

51
Non-Normal Populations (2 of 6) - Slide 49
Sample size = 5
Histogram with an x-axis ranging from 0 to 77.9360. The histogram is clustered between 36 and
60, with a peak around 48.71.
Transcript
This is the distribution of the sample means. Remember, we took 100 samples, 5 observations
selected in each of these 100. The histogram here shows the distribution of means for each of
these 100 samples.
Non-Normal Populations (3 of 6) - Slide 50

52
Sample size = 25
Histogram clustered between 38,9680 and 59 with a peak around 56.
Transcript
Increase the sample size to 25. The histogram here shows the distribution of the means for these
100 samples.
Non-Normal Populations (4 of 6) - Slide 51
Sample size = 50
Histogram is clustered between 41 and 57 with a peak around 56.
Transcript
Now increase the sample size to 50. The histogram here shows the distribution of means for
these 100 samples.

53
Non-Normal Populations (5 of 6) - Slide 52
Sample size = 100
Histogram is clustered between 42 and 56.5 with a peak around 56.
Transcript
And here's the histogram that shows the distribution of the means for 100 samples when each
sample had 100 randomly selected observations. Just as we saw before, as the sample size
increase, the distribution of averages become both more normal as well as narrower, even
though the underlying distribution for our data was not normal.
Non-Normal Populations (6 of 6) - Slide 53

54
Histograms showing how the central limit theorem can be applied to non-normal populations.
Transcript
So, the central limit theorem those that regardless of the true distribution of the population, the
distribution of these sample means will always be approximately normal if the sample is large
enough. There is something very special about this phenomenon which gives us the normal
distribution. This means that we can use the properties of normal distribution whether or not the
actual population is normal. Using this knowledge, we can now take samples and make
inferences about the population. For example, based on a sample of consumers tested, decide
which features will be appreciated most by the overall consumer market. Or based on a sample
of likely voters, who would win an election.
Distribution of Sampling Means - Slide 54
Mean Average Temperatures. Histogram is clustered between 40 and 57 with a peak at around
56.
x̄  is the point estimator for the population mean
Standard Error: σ¯x =
s
√n

55
Transcript
I mentioned this earlier, but it's important to repeat this. This histogram you see on this slide
represents the distribution of the means of the 100 samples we had taken. Like before, we can
describe a distribution by central tendency and its variability. When we are working with sample
means, that's the distribution for these means, the central tendency is x-bar and its variability is
referred to as a standard error, which is calculated by taking the population standard deviation
and dividing it by the square root of n, our sample size. Mathematically, then, you should see that
as the sample size increases, the denominator of this equation increases, which means the
variability received for the distribution of the sample means decreases. That is why results
obtained from larger sample sizes are more reliable. The larger the sample size, the narrower the
distribution of the sample means become, and thus the closer the mean of the sample gets to the
true mean of the population. This is why sample size matters so much in any statistical analysis.
We will learn more about what the sample size should be in the next module.
The Ultimate Payoff of Central Limit Theorem - Slide
55
A bell curve is placed over a histogram that ranges from negative 3 to 3 on the x-axis, with a
peak between negative 1 and 1.68 percent range from negative 1 to 1.95 percent from negative 2
to 2 and 99.7 percent from negative 3 to 3.

56
Transcript
Finally, we have arrived at the payoff of all this. Since the sample means are distributed normally,
thanks to our superhero central limit theorem, we can harness the power of normal curve. That is,
we expect about 68% of all sample means to lie within one standard error of the population
mean, 95% of the sample means will be within two standard errors of population mean, and
99.7% of the sample means will lie within three standard errors of the population mean. Knowing
this, now we can take just one sample and we can assess if we were unlucky and ended up with
a sample that provides a mean closer to the tails rather than the center of the distribution. And
being able to asses this will allow us to know to what degree we can be confident about our
sample study. This is the topic of our next module, so more on this later.
Lesson 3-3.2 Animating the Central Limit Theorem
Media Player for Video 
Animation (1 of 19) - Slide 56
Histogram in bell curve labeled Parent Population (can be changed with the mouse). Data within
1 standard deviation of the mean indicated by a red bar. Mean 16.00. Median 16.00. Standard
Deviation 5.00. At the right of the histogram, a tab labeled Clear lower 3 with Normal highlighted.
Rice Virtual Lab in Statistics Sampling Distributions 
Transcript
I'm going to use this animation to show you how central limit theorem works in practice. If I have
an underlying population with a normal distribution, it is not a surprise that if I take samples from
here over and over again, those sample means will also if plotted will look normal.

57
Animation (2 of 19) - Slide 57
Selects on Clear lower 3 tab and drop down menu appears. Selects Custom.
Transcript
So, what I'm going to do is that I'm going to change my underlying population to something other
than normal by just randomly clicking observations and this is what my population looks like. And
as you can see, it's far from being normal.
Animation (3 of 19) - Slide 58
Selects six random point ranges on the histogram.

58
Transcript
No instruction provided during this slide.
Animation (4 of 19) - Slide 59
Mean: 14.80. Median: 11.00. Standard Deviation: 9:45. Skew: 0.28. Kurtosis: −1.35.
Transcript
As a matter a fact if you look here, it says that for the population distribution that I have created
the mean is 14.80. The median is 11. So, far from being the same. So, it's a bell-shaped curve
would require these to be almost the same. And it has a standard deviation of 9.45. So, now what
I'm going to do is that I'm going to animate it. And, and the first time that I will click on this what
you will see is that I have two plots being plotted here – distribution for means when sample size
is five and distribution of for means when sample size is 25.

59
Animation (5 of 19) - Slide 60
Three employ graphs under histogram labeled: Sample Data, Distribution of Means N equals 5,
and Distribution of Means N equals 25. To the right, a box labeled Sample with 4 cells
underneath: Animated, 5, 10,000, and 100,000. Selects the Animated button. Data will be
collected from histogram she created and populate the three individual graphs underneath,
according to their label.
Transcript
So, the first time I click on this, it's going to draw five random observations from my population,
drop them down here and then plot the average for those five down here. Then, it will go and take
25 random observations from my population, drop them here and then take the averages of those
25 and plot them here.

60
Animation (6 of 19) - Slide 61
Transcript
So, I'm going to animate this one so you can see. One, two, three, four, five and their sample
mean came here. As you can see up here now, it's dropping 25 from that, and once it has 25
observations it will drop the mean of those 25 right here.
Animation (7 of 19) - Slide 62
Blocks of individual data drop to Sample data graph and when 5 blocks drop and a single block
drops to next graph: Distribution of Means, N equals five. Twenty more blocks fall to the Sample
Data graph and a single block drops to lower graph: Distribution of Means, N equals 25. The
Means of 25 block is more in the middle of the graph, while N equals 5 is skewed to the left.

61
Transcript
It just happens. I'm going to show you one more time what this will look like.
Animation (8 of 19) - Slide 63
Second sample of 5 and 25 taken.
Transcript
So, this is the second sample that it will be drawn from that population. The sample of five is
being taken. Their mean came down. And now the second sample of 25 is being taken. And the
second one came out. So, now you see that I have two repetitions, which means I have taken
two samples of five and two samples of 25. And these are the respective means.

62
Animation (9 of 19) - Slide 64
First animation: mean of 0.00, median of 13.50, standard deviation of 0.00 and second animation:
mean of 0.00, median of 14.50, standard deviation of 0.00.
Transcript
So, what you're seeing here is that this is a distribution of my population.
Animation (10 of 19) - Slide 65
Random selection of Parent Population.

63
Transcript
What is going to be developed here is the distribution of the sample means for five and 25. And
central limit theorem will tell me that if I do this often enough, these will look normal even though
this is not normal.
Animation (11 of 19) - Slide 66
Means will look normal even if random sample does not look normal. Select 5 under Animated at
right of sample data graph.
Transcript
So, now let me animate it five times and you can see what happens. This is seven repetitions and
seven repetitions. So, when I say automatically do it, it's not going to show you how it's dropping
it. But it's the same principals. As you can see, it's right now nothing near normal distribution. But
it is about repeating this a lot. So, let me repeat it 10 thousand time and see what happens to the
distribution of the sample means. Remember, these are sample means and we are looking at the
distribution of those. So, what happens at 10 thousand?

64
Animation (12 of 19) - Slide 67
Means equals 25 has narrow bell curve with steep slopes.
Transcript
It is looking a lot more normal. Look at it. It's almost normal here. And, of course, it's tighter as
the sample size goes up. So, what happens if I do this 100 thousand time?
Animation (13 of 19) - Slide 68
Sample becomes more normal.

65
Transcript
Again, you will see this. So, this is what central limit theorem shows us. Beauty of the central limit
theorem is that if you have any population, given a large enough sample size and this isn't even
large enough. We want it to be at least 30 or more. We will start getting a sampling distribution
that is normal. And this is why then I can say what is the variability I expect if I take just the
sample out of here.
Animation (14 of 19) - Slide 69
Mean of 25 point to far right of the graph in the third deviation.
Transcript
So, if I took a sample and all of a sudden, the mean is here, it's quite an outlier. It doesn't happen
that often.

66
Animation (15 of 19) - Slide 70
Standard error shape is shown.
Transcript
So, what I'm going to do now is show you how these values are calculated. So, this is the
standard deviation of the population and the shape of this is what we call standard error.
Animation (16 of 19) - Slide 71
Standard error: σ¯x =
s
√n

67
Transcript
And the standard error is calculated by taking the value of the population standard deviation and
dividing it by square root of the sample size.
Animation (17 of 19) - Slide 72
Formula. Standard Error: sigma sub x bar equals 9.45 divided by square root of 5 equals 4.22. 
Transcript
So, if I take 9.45 and divide it by square root of 5, I should get 4.22.

68
Animation (18 of 19) - Slide 73
Formula. Standard Error: sigma sub x bar equals 9.45 divided by square root of 25 equals 1.89.
Transcript
Likewise, if I take 9.45 and divide it by square root of 25, I should get standard error of 1.89. So,
what it says is that the distribution of these means is a lot more cohesive, a lot less varied
compared to the population. Furthermore, the larger your sample size gets, the tighter these
samples will become, these sample means will become. They're clustered around the one central
point.
Animation (19 of 19) - Slide 74
Mean of sample is close to mean of population.

69
Transcript
Now, look at what we get for our estimation of the mean. Remember, the mean of our population
is 14.8. What happened to the mean of the sampling distribution 14.78? Very close. When we did
it for n= 25, even closer, 14.79. And this is the beauty and the strength of central limit theorem
that shows that if you do sampling, if you do your sampling correctly, then you should get a
sample that is a good and fair representation of your population. Therefore, the statistics that you
come up with using your sample information would be a good point estimator of your population
parameter.
Lesson 3-3.3 Sampling Distribution and Empirical
Rule in Excel
Media Player for Video 
Excel Sheet (1 of 20) - Slide 75
Image of Excel worksheet. Average of daily low and high temperatures (in degrees Fahrenheit)
for various major city airports. Data obtained on 9/24/2015 from National Centers for
Environmental Information Climate Data. Temperatures for New York (LaGuardia) in Column C.
Download the Daily Temperature excel file (Refer to MinMaxSD - Second worksheet) 
Transcript
In this video, I would like to illustrate the concept of empirical rule and the central limit theorem.
So, I'm going to do this by using our temperature data for New York. We have over 26,000 data
points for New York, which represents average daily temperatures for the last 25 years. And what
I'm going to do is that I'm going to select the sample from this data set over and over again. Let
me first show you some characteristics about this data.

70
Excel Sheet (2 of 20) - Slide 76
Minimum temperature of 2.6. Maximum temperature of 94.5. Average temperature of 55.2 and
standard deviation of 17.37963233.
Transcript
I have calculated the minimum average daily temperature observed in the last 25 years. And this
turns out to be 2.6 degrees and the maximum observed in this data set is 94.5. For this data set,
the average of the over 26,000 data points shows an average of 55.2 as the average daily
temperature that you expect with a standard deviation of roughly about 17.38. So, what I have
done is that I have taken a sample from this data set. The samples I have taken will have 72
observations in each. So, for example, sample number one we selected 72 random days out of
our larger data set. And we found out that the average for that set, for the sample was 54.7

71
Excel Sheet (3 of 20) - Slide 77
100,000 samples with each sample having 72 randomly selected dates for New York. Two
columns. Column A Sample number and column B Sample Average.
Download the Daily Temperature excel file (Refer to Random Samples - Third worksheet) 
Transcript
And then, I repeated this again and took a second sample. I have in total taken 100,000 different
samples from this data set. And what I'm going to do is that I'm going to show you how the
averages of these samples will distribute. So, that will be the central limit theorem. And then
show you the concept of empirical rule.

72
Excel Sheet (4 of 20) - Slide 78
Minimum of 47.2 and maximum of 64.2.
Transcript
So, to do this, I first want to know what bins I need to pick and for that, I'm going to see what was
my minimum average that I got. The minimum average that I notice in my 100,000 samples was
47.2. Maximum that I saw has been 64.2. So, at least one sample resulted in an average daily of
47.2 and one sample represented 64.2.
Excel Sheet (5 of 20) - Slide 79
Average of 55.2 and standard deviation of 17.37963233

73
Transcript
And as you know, my actual average was 55.2. So, there are a couple of samples that are quite
far off from here.
Excel Sheet (6 of 20) - Slide 80
Formula. Equals Average in cell, chooses Average from drop down menu.
Transcript
But let me find what is the average that I get from the entire set of samples I have taken, so
that's, this would be the average of the 100,000 that I have done. And this turns out to be 55.2,
which is what I had for my population. So, this is something we know, that the average of the
averages often time becomes very close to the actual population average. And it would be the
same thing if you were doing proportion by the way.

74
Excel Sheet (7 of 20) - Slide 81
Formula. Equals STDV.S(B4:B end of column).
Transcript
So, we can take the standard deviation of the sample means also. I can come up with this value
by just taking the standard deviation function and selecting the average temperatures for my
100,000 samples. And this gives me the value of 2.05.
Excel Sheet (8 of 20) - Slide 82
Formula. Equals 17.38 divided by square root of 72.

75
Transcript
Now, as a reminder, when we are talking about the standard deviation of sampling mean, we
actually call this standard error. Standard error – which shows the standard deviation of the
sampling means distribution is your standard deviation of population divided by square root of n.
And, of course, if I don't have the standard deviation of the population, if I don't have this, and I
have only one sample, I will use s, the standard deviation of that sample in here.
Excel Sheet (9 of 20) - Slide 83
Compares Standard Deviation value to Standard Error value.
Transcript
No instruction provided during this slide.

76
Excel Sheet (10 of 20) - Slide 84
Standard Error is 2.048253
Transcript
So, now let me see what value I get if I use the theoretical way of calculating it. Based on our
calculations, the standard deviation is 17.38. So, therefore, I am looking for, I am looking for
17.38 divided by the square root of 72, because that's what I had taken in each of the sample.
So, if I use this equation, what would the standard error be? So, this is my theoretical way of
finding the standard error. It would be equal to 17.38 divided by square root of 72, my sample
size in each sample and it's 2.048. So, look at these two values now. Look at this value and look
at this value – 2.05 and 2.048. So, they are roughly about the same. So, this is why the standard
error is calculated by taking the sample standard deviation and dividing it by the square root of
72. This is the variability you see in the sample means. So, now let's look at our complete data
and see what the histogram would look like for the entire 26,000 observations that we have.

77
Excel Sheet (11 of 20) - Slide 85
NY Temp ranging from 0 to 100 degrees on the x-axis and 0 to 500 frequency on the y-axis. The
histogram is in a bell shaped curve with two peaks: 40 degrees and 76 degrees.
Download the Daily Temperature excel file (Refer to NYC Temp Histogram - Fourth worksheet) 
Transcript
So, here's the histogram I have for over 26,000 temperature recordings that I have for New York
City. And this does not look like a normal distribution that you are used to seeing. So, what would
it look like if plot these values?
Excel Sheet (12 of 20) - Slide 86

78
Create Bin column. Select Minimum and Maximum averages values of 47.2 and 64.2.
Transcript
So, I'm going to use these values as a way of selecting my bin when I'm creating the histogram
for my sample averages. So, let's say that I would like my bins to go anywhere between 45 and
let's say 66 or 67 or 65. Something like that. So, I'm going to say 45 and I don't want to do all the
numbers by myself. So, what I'm going to do is that I'm going to go to home, pick this, pick series,
and now say go from 45 in half a degree temperature differences all the way, let's say to 65. And
this would be definitely.
Excel Sheet (13 of 20) - Slide 87
Selects Home and chooses Arrow Down button at far right of the screen. Then, selects Series.
Transcript
No instruction provided during this slide.

79
Excel Sheet (14 of 20) - Slide 88
Pop up window at Series. Selects Rows then Linear. Step value of .5 and Stop value of 66. Then,
select Column.
Transcript
No instruction provided during this slide.
Excel Sheet (15 of 20) - Slide 89
Bin column populates with numbers.

80
Transcript
So, I'm going to say go to 66 and I'm going to fill up a column. Just remember to click on this
also. And it should fill this column for me all the way to 66 in half a degree increments and it
does. So, if I just look at this, we will see that it goes all the way to 66. So, I'm going to use this as
my bin to create the histogram that represents the distribution of my sample means.
Excel Sheet (16 of 20) - Slide 90
In Data Analysis menu, Histogram is highlighted.
Transcript
No instruction provided during this slide.

81
Excel Sheet (17 of 20) - Slide 91
Chooses Data Analysis from Far right of Menu bar. Select Histogram from drop down menu. In
Pop up window: Input range is $B$3:B$end of column. Bin Range is $G$3:G$end of Column.
Select Labels. Select Chart Output at bottom of window, then enter $H$3 in Output range.
Transcript
No instruction provided during this slide.
Excel Sheet (18 of 20) - Slide 92
Histogram of bin is bell curve with a median close to 55.
Download the Daily Temperature excel file (Refer to Sample Histogram - Fifth worksheet) 

82
Transcript
So, I'll go to data, data analysis, pick histogram. In histogram the input range is going to be where
I have my 100,000 sample averages. Scroll back up. And I am also going to give my bin to it. I'm
going to say use these bins to find the frequencies. So, I pick the entire set of bins that I have.
And I have used labels for both. So, I'm going to say there is a label. I want to make sure it gives
me a histogram. So, click on chart output and I'm going to put in this table somewhere so we can
look at it. So, I'm going to say output range and I'm going to put the output range, remember to
click in this window before clicking anywhere on the spread sheet, and I'm going to put it
somewhere here. It's going to recreate my bins and then it's going to put the frequencies next to it
and then give me the histogram. So okay, and here's my histogram. So, I'm going to move it so
you can see. Here's my histogram. I'm going to make it larger. So, what do you see? This is the
distribution of my sample means. Definitely looks a whole lot like a normal distribution. If it not a
perfect match, pretty close, right? It is centered around 55.2 and the distributions variability. The
shape of it is your standard error, which is 2.048. So, it is much more tightly together and it's the
normal distribution as compared to my complete data. So, this is the illustration of central limit
theorem. Most of the sample means will fall near the center and it will be a normal distribution.
Why does the empirical rule matters here? So, please remember that our standard error is about
2.05. So, I am just going to round this up to 2.05 to show you the idea of the empirical rule.
Excel Sheet (19 of 20) - Slide 93
Histogram is slightly skewed to the right of the line of the new graph, with some bars shorter on
the left and some bars higher on the right.
Download the Daily Temperature excel file (Refer to NYC sample mean graphs - Sixth
worksheet) 

83
Transcript
I have gone ahead and redrawn my histogram and also have fitted it with the theoretical normal
curve and what you can see is that it is very close. Sure enough, there are a few places that our
observations do not exactly fit the normal curve. But we can all agree that it is a very, very close
fit. So, now I can talk about the empirical rule and how does it matter to us. If you remember,
empirical rule states that 98% of all observations for a normal distribution will fall plus or minus 1
standard error from the mean.
Excel Sheet (20 of 20) - Slide 94
Draws two lines on the histogram and labels area between the lines 68 percent. Formula. Plus or
minus 2 times Standard Error. Draws two lines on histogram and labels area between the two
lines 95.5 percent. Formula. Plus or minus 3 times Standard Error. Draws two lines on histogram
and labels area between the two lines 99.7 percent.

84
Transcript
In our case, our mean is 55.2 and our standard error for the distribution of the sample means is
2.05. So, when I say plus or minus 1 standard error, this implies 55.2 plus the 2.05 and 55.2
minus the 2.05, and that would be 57.25 and 53.15. So, if I were drawing this now in my
histogram, where would that fall? So, 53.15 is roughly around 53. So, I'm just going to take that
bar and highlight it. So, right here. And 57.25 falls within 57 and 57.5. So, somewhere here. So,
what we are saying is that 68% of samples will return a mean that will be within plus or minus 1
standard error of the true mean, which is 55.2. And 95.5% will fall within 2 standard error. And in
this case, that will be 55.2 plus 2 times the 2.05 and 55.2 minus 2 times the 2.05, and these
values will be 59.3 and 51.1. So, again if you were trying this, 59.3 is roughly around here and
51.1 is about here. So, it's 95.5% of the sample means that you will get will fall within these two
boundaries. And 99.7% of the sample means will fall within 3 standard error. And in this case,
that will be 55.2 plus 3 times the 2.05 and 55.2 minus 3 times the 2.05. And that would be 61.35
and 49.05. So, when we go to draw this and this is 61 and this is about 49 and this would include
99.7%. And you can see that with our data the empirical rule has worked out, and that will be the
case in every case. That's why this is a theorem. So, it doesn't matter if your underlying
distribution is normal or not. The distribution of the sample means if you have a large enough
sample size will be normal distribution and empirical rule will hold.

85
Lesson 3-4 Central Limit Theorem – Sampling
Population
Lesson 3-4.1 Central Limit Theorem – Sampling
Proportion
Media Player for Video 
Distribution of the Sample Proportion (1 of 2) - Slide
95
Proportion of the population that prefers online banking to traditional banking?
Proportion of the population who would vote for one of the candidates running for office?
Transcript
Central limit theorem doesn't apply just to the sample means. The normal distribution phenomena
also occurs when we are interested in knowing proportions. For instance, what proportion of the
population would prefer to bank online rather than go to the bank, proportion of population who
would vote for one of the candidates running for the office, and so on. To answer questions such
as this, once again, we will rely on a sample study. And then based on what we see in our
sample, we will generalize about the population.

86
Distribution of the Sample Proportion (2 of 2) - Slide
96
A proportion is the percentage of the group that belongs to the category you’re interested
in.
The population proportion is denoted by p.
The sample proportion is denoted by ˆp.
Transcript
When the random variable we are interested in is in form of proportion, then you're asking what
percentage of the population belongs to a category of interest. The population proportion is
denoted by P, and sample proportion is denoted by x̂ , though many times the hat is left off and we
just use P. We take samples to estimate the population proportion.

87
Distribution of the Sample Proportion - An Example (1
of 2) - Slide 97
We run an online shopping site and advertise on many online sites to bring customers to our
website.
Two types of customers:
1. Buy
2. Don’t buy
Transcript
Let's consider this example. We run an online shopping site, and advertise on many online sites,
like Google, Yahoo, Facebook, and so on to bring customers to our websites. We like to know
which of the online ads bring us customers who actually will end up buying something. So, we
have two categories, customers who buy and customers who don't buy. The marketing
department is doing the analysis by going over the data for one of the websites that hosts our
advertising.

88
Distribution of the Sample Proportion - An Example (2
of 2) - Slide 98
400 customers clicked on our advertisement link, and 118 of those ended up buying something.
ˆp =
= 0. 295
Transcript
For a given period, the data shows that 400 customers click on our advertisement link, and 118 of
those ended up buying something. Based on this example, we can then estimate that 29.5% of
customers coming through this link are buyers, the kind we like. But what if we take another day?
What would we see? This is what central theorem helps us. So, let me, again, explain how
central limit theorem helps us by explaining this example in another way.
118
400

89
Distribution of the Sample Proportion (1 of 4) - Slide
99
Let’s assume the following:
True population proportion is 0.3
Sample size (n) = 50

90
Sample proportion example
Sample Number
Count of "Buy"
Sample Proportion
1
19
0.38
2
14
0.28
3
11
0.22
4
19
0.38
5
24
0.48
6
10
0.2
7
18
0.36
8
16
0.32
9
13
0.26
10
11
0.22

91
Histogram, a bar graph of the data with seven bars spread out across the graph.
Transcript
So, let's start by saying that we actually know that 30% of customers who click on this particular
ad come to our website and then end up buying. What can we expect if we take a sample of 50
customers and repeat this 10 times? This table here shows the results of 10 randomly drawn
samples of 50 observation each from such a population. So, for instance, in the first sample,
there were 19 out of 50 who bought something, or 19 were buyers. That is, 38% of sample 1.
How then do our samples represent the proportion, the true proportion? So, let's look at the
histogram of the 10 proportions. The proportion for these 10 samples range from .2 to .48. So, if
we are taking only one such sample, we could actually get the values that are quite far off from
reality.
Distribution of the Sample Proportion (2 of 4) - Slide
100
Sample size (n) = 100
Histogram with six bars spread out across the graph.
Sample size (n) = 1000
Histogram with four bars close together on the graph.

92
Transcript
What can we expect if we take a sample of 100 customers and repeat this 10 times? Here is a
histogram. We can see that the range here is between .24 to .39 compared to sample size of 50,
the spread of the sample proportions begins to decrease. Now increase the sample size to 1,000
and take 10 different samples. The histogram for these 10 samples become much narrower and
start to approximately look like a bell shape. Look at the spread now. It is from .26 to .34.
Distribution of the Sample Proportion (3 of 4) - Slide
101
A bell curve is drawn over the histogram.
A large, properly drawn sample will resemble the population from which it is drawn.
Transcript
Approximately normal distribution does result from a large sample size is what the central
theorem is all about. As you can see in our example where we assume we knew the true
proportion to be 30%, our distribution fitted with a normal curve with peaking around a central
value of .30 also. This is the core principle underlying the central limit theorem, which is a large
properly drawn sample will resemble the population from which it is drawn. Obviously, there
would be variation from sample to sample, but the probability that a given sample will deviate
massively from the underlying population is very low.

93
Distribution of the Sample Proportion (4 of 4) - Slide
102
σˆp = √
Transcript
The spread of this distribution is known as the standard error and is calculated by multiplying P,
which is the estimate for the proportion, by 1 − P, and then dividing it by the sample size N, and
then taking the square root of this ratio. This is what is powerful about central theorem, and that
is the ability to use only one sample of sufficient size to make inference about a population. It
doesn't also matter if the underlying population is normal or not, as long as the sample size is
large enough. In the next module, we will learn how to use the sample information and make
inferences about the population. For now, be sure to view the Excel illustration as well so you will
get a more hands-on view of this phenomena.
p ( 1−p )
n
