Banking and Financial Institutions 
Professor Rustom Manouchehri Irani 
1 
Module 1: Money and Finance  
Table of Contents 
Module 1: Money and Finance ............................................................................................... 1 
Module 1 Information ....................................................................................................................2 
Lesson 1-0: Overview ............................................................................................................................................ 2 
Lesson 1-1: Money and Payments ...................................................................................................3 
Lesson 1-1.1. Money and Its Functions ................................................................................................................. 3 
Lesson 1-1.2: The Payments System ................................................................................................................... 10 
Lesson 1-1.3: Money and Inflation ..................................................................................................................... 17 
Lesson 1-2: The Financial System .................................................................................................. 27 
Lesson 1-2.1: What Does the Financial System Do? ........................................................................................... 27 
Lesson 1-2.2: Financial Markets Versus Financial Institutions ............................................................................ 36 
Lesson 1-2.3: Banks Versus Non-Banks ............................................................................................................... 49 
Lesson 1-2.4: Overview of Non-Banks ................................................................................................................ 56 
Lesson 1-3: Finance and the Real Economy .................................................................................... 67 
Lesson 1-3.1: Financial Development and Economic Activity ............................................................................. 67 
 
 
 

Banking and Financial Institutions 
Professor Rustom Manouchehri Irani 
2 
Module 1 Information 
Lesson 1-0: Overview 
 
Hello everyone and welcome to Module 1 of financial institutions. This module is called 
Money and Finance. It is going to provide a broad overview of money, the financial 
system and how this all connects with real economic activity. We will begin by 
introducing money and the payment system and answer the following questions: What 
is money? How can we measure it? What is the relationship between the quantity of 
money and the inflation rate? Next, we will describe the financial system. What is the 
purpose of the financial system? What is the difference between financial markets and 
financial institutions? This is a course on financial institutions, so we will want to 
understand who these financial institutions are and how they add value. In a final step, 
we will put money and finance together and examine the connection between financial 
development and real economic activity. Financial development means faster and better 
money and finance. This can be great for economic growth and risk-sharing, but it can 
also lead to financial instability and economic crashes. By the end of this module, you 
should have a big picture understanding of what money and finance is and its potential 
benefits and costs. 
 
 
 
 

Banking and Financial Institutions 
Professor Rustom Manouchehri Irani 
3 
Lesson 1-1: Money and Payments 
Lesson 1-1.1. Money and Its Functions 
 
In this session, we will discuss money and the payment system. This will involve two steps. 
First, we will define the term money. This seems like a very strange question given that we all 
use money all of the time. However, what has worked as money has changed a lot over time 
and is even being debated today. In this session, we will think more carefully about what makes 
an asset usable as money. In a second step, we will describe the modern payment system 
which consists of the methods we use to pay for things, and explain how it relates to money.  
Let's start with my favorite motivating example, the beach vacation. Beach holidays have been a 
constant throughout human history, well, presumably. How we have paid for these holidays, the 
money, and payment choices we've made have changed in meaningful ways. Arrowheads in 
8th century Japan, seashells in China, salt in Venice and metals such as gold. These are 
examples of commodity money. Commodity money has been used to pay for things throughout 
human history.  
 

Banking and Financial Institutions 
Professor Rustom Manouchehri Irani 
4 
 
It has two characteristics. First, it is backed by a physical item. Second, that item has some 
intrinsic value. The item is worth something even if it is not used for payments. Salt is a valuable 
preservative. Arrowheads can be used to shoot people. Fast forward about 1000 years to 16th 
century Sweden. At that time copper plates were used as currency. This was a form of 
commodity money because copper wasn't all that valuable at the time. This meant you had to 
lug a large amount of copper around to make transactions, not terribly convenient. In 1657 
along comes a Swede named Palmstruch. He sets up the Stockholms Banco which was the first 
European bank to print paper money. This paper money was redeemable on-demand. You 
could exchange the paper for the metal money, so your copper, that you had to deposit it at the 
bank.  
 

Banking and Financial Institutions 
Professor Rustom Manouchehri Irani 
5 
So long as people believed that there was enough copper at Palmstruch's bank then the paper 
money was valuable. In 1667, however, the bank began to run out of copper. Swedes started to 
lose faith in Palmstruch and the bank had to close down. The question of why they started to 
lose faith is absolutely fascinating and central to the topic of bank risk management but that's for 
a later time. The United States issued paper money backed by gold until the 1930s. This was 
called the gold standard.  
 
Today we use fiat money which is paper money that is not backed by any physical commodity. 
The paper money has zero intrinsic value. In 2021 it costs the US Treasury just 14 cents to print 

Banking and Financial Institutions 
Professor Rustom Manouchehri Irani 
6 
and engrave a $100 bill. Why is fiat money useful for anything? Well, it's because the 
government says so. The law says private businesses must accept dollar bills as payment. I'm 
also allowed to pay my taxes in dollars so long as I have trust in the government then these 
pieces of paper are valuable.  
 
We all know what a debit or credit card looks like. You probably have one within arm's length. 
But you might not understand the mechanics of how this plastic works. A debit card payment 
provides instructions for my bank to send my money from my bank account to a merchant. 
Without a bank account containing money, this just wouldn't work. On the other hand, when I 
use my credit card I'm actually getting a loan from a bank, when I swipe my credit card I am 
authorizing my bank to send some of its funds to pay for my beach vacation, and then I can 
repay my bank at some later date. The first modern plastic credit card was introduced by the 
Bank of America in Fresno California in 1958.  
 

Banking and Financial Institutions 
Professor Rustom Manouchehri Irani 
7 
Nowadays smartphone applications and other online payment systems are replacing our need 
for plastic debit and credit cards. Apple Pay, Venmo, WeChat, these are 21st century systems 
that allow us to make cheap, quick, and secure money transfers to friends and family or 
payments for our shopping. We've come a long way from sea shells to PayPal.  
 
 
Now let's take a step back and formally define what money is. It is a specialized asset. It is 
generally accepted as a means of payment for goods and services or the repayment of debts 
and this includes paying taxes. The most important examples of money are the cash in your 
pocket and your bank account balances. This is what I want you to keep in mind. I also want 

Banking and Financial Institutions 
Professor Rustom Manouchehri Irani 
8 
you to keep in mind that money is not the same as wealth, a wealthy individual might have lots 
of assets besides money. In fact, if you think of your favorite rich person they probably have lots 
of houses, yachts, rocket ships, stock options, and so on. None of that stuff is money.   
 
 
Money is a means of payment. This is money's special role. In modern economies transactions 
are frequent. They can be spread out across long distances. Money is central to a well-
functioning economy. We use money to finalize transactions. I don't have to wait for payment 
later. I get my money in hand, exchange complete. The value of money is well understood. I 
don't require any information about the value of money from you. I don't need to check the 
newspaper or online for recent transaction prices. I know exactly what is worth once you have 
paid me.  
 

Banking and Financial Institutions 
Professor Rustom Manouchehri Irani 
9 
  
If money is a means of payment then two outcomes follow quite naturally. First, we say that 
money is a unit of account. This means that we can quote prices and record debts in terms of it, 
in terms of dollars and cents. This allows us to easily compare the value of different products. 
Second, money must have stable values. If we are going to use money in lots and lots of 
transactions then it must hold its value from day to day. Its purchasing power must remain 
relatively stable over time. If its value were unstable you may have heard of hyperinflation where 
the purchasing power of a currency rapidly declines over time then merchants might not be 
willing to accept money. This is why in some countries we can use the local currency as well as 
US dollar as money. Merchants understand that the US dollars are a stable store value. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Banking and Financial Institutions 
Professor Rustom Manouchehri Irani 
10 
Lesson 1-1.2: The Payments System 
 
Money in the payment system go hand in hand. Formally, the payment system is a web 
of arrangements that allows for the exchange of goods, services, and assets. It's often 
called the financial plumbing of the economy. These systems require more 
infrastructure than we perhaps realize and are a source of rapid behind-the-scenes 
financial innovation. The economy depends on an efficient payment system so 
governments and policymakers pay very close attention to it. In many cases, central 
banks such as the Federal Reserve System were created to facilitate payments. It is 
important to recognize that not all transactions involve an exchange of paper currency. 
Sometimes we make non-cash payments. All non-cash payments eventually involve an 
exchange of money. Usually this will be from one bank account to another bank account 
but there can be several steps before that actually happens.  
 

Banking and Financial Institutions 
Professor Rustom Manouchehri Irani 
11 
Here are the main types of non-cash payments. Believe it or not, paper checks are still 
an important payment method in the United States. I will say that again in case you 
missed it. A paper check is not money. It is not currency. It is a method of payment. 
When you give someone a check to pay for something, this check provides an 
instruction to your bank to move your funds from your bank accounts to a merchant's 
bank accounts. In the U.S., the local Federal Reserve is often responsible for clearing 
these checks, which means processing the transfer of money between bank accounts. 
The other common payment types are all electronic in nature. Automated Clearing 
House or ACH transactions act just like checks. An instruction is given from your bank 
to move money from your bank account into another bank account but they happen 
electronically and are faster and have less administrative hassle. ACH transfers are 
most often initiated with a debit or a credit card. With a debit card transaction, funds are 
transferred from my bank accounts. With a credit card transaction funds are transferred 
from the credit card issuing banks' accounts. A loan is created in the process. Prepaid 
debit cards are important means of payment. In some countries, they are not linked to a 
customer's bank account. Digital wallets allow us to initiate electronic debit or credit 
transfers from our computers or smartphones. They most often store our payment 
information from our debit or credit cards. Apple Pay is a market leader in this space. 
Other money transfer apps such as Venmo or Zelle allow money transfers between 
friends and family.  
To summarize, we can make payments using cash or a non-cash payment method. 
These non-cash payment methods are often linked to the funds in our bank accounts. 
This is why economists consider paper currency plus bank account balances as a core 
measure of money. According to data from the Federal Reserve, in 2018 there were 

Banking and Financial Institutions 
Professor Rustom Manouchehri Irani 
12 
about 175 billion non-cash payments with a total value of about $100 trillion. Before you 
ask we do not have any information about cash payments.  
 
 
Here we can see the breakdown in the value of non-cash payments by the type of 
method used, so this is not the number of payments but the dollar value of payments. 
We can see the checks and then the electronic payments. Clearly, the trend is away 
from checks and towards electronic payments. In 2012, credit card payments exceeded 
checks for the first time. Although I must say, checks continue to play a more important 
role in payments than I would have thought. This is a case study that might make some 
of you shout at me –  Is Bitcoin money? 

Banking and Financial Institutions 
Professor Rustom Manouchehri Irani 
13 
 
Cryptocurrencies combined new payment systems with new currencies that are not 
issued by governments. The currency itself is a digital token that can be bought and 
sold. Trades are recorded using distributed ledger technology also known as 
blockchain. This involves an electronic database that records and verifies transactions 
without the need for verification by a government authority. Bitcoin, which has been 
around since 2008, is by far the most famous example. Now there are two potential 
advantages here. First, the value of cryptocurrencies cannot be undermined by 
governments since they do not control the supply of these digital tokens. Second, since 
transactions do not need to be verified by any government authority, uses can make 
electronic payments while staying anonymous, so is Bitcoin money or not? Well, let's 
analyze our three characteristics of money.  
 

Banking and Financial Institutions 
Professor Rustom Manouchehri Irani 
14 
Is Bitcoin a useful means of payment? Well not really. It has no intrinsic value since it is 
not commodity money backed by an asset. It is not legal tender either, so businesses 
are not required to accept it. It cannot be used to pay taxes. Now, this might change but 
we're not quite there yet. So far, Bitcoin plays no role in any normal economic activity in 
any well-functioning country. If anything Bitcoin transactions have been associated 
primarily with criminal activity such as drug dealing or cyberattacks. For this reason, 
what most societies don't want to make life easier for criminals. China has clamped 
down on crypto transactions. Next, is Bitcoin a stable store of value? No, it doesn't really 
look like it. These big swings in prices make Bitcoin resemble a speculative asset rather 
than a currency. For this reason under the US tax code, Bitcoin and other 
cryptocurrencies have been classified as property and taxed as an investments.  
 

Banking and Financial Institutions 
Professor Rustom Manouchehri Irani 
15 
Given the wild fluctuations in its value, the prices of taxi rides or Tesla cars would be 
highly unstable if they were priced in terms of Bitcoin as opposed to US dollars. 
Perhaps this might change in the future, but for now, Bitcoin does not resemble a 
reliable government-issued currency such as the U.S. dollar or the Euro.  
 
Let's sum up. Money is a special asset that is widely accepted for making payments. It's 
useful for measuring and comparing values, and it's a store of value that allows me to 

Banking and Financial Institutions 
Professor Rustom Manouchehri Irani 
16 
transfer my purchasing power into the future. The payment system sends our money 
around. We make the distinction between cash and non-cash payments. Recent data 
seems to indicate that electronic payments are becoming more important. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Banking and Financial Institutions 
Professor Rustom Manouchehri Irani 
17 
Lesson 1-1.3: Money and Inflation 
 
In this session, we will move beyond money as a concept and towards the 
measurement of the total amounts of money circulating in the economy. Why do we 
need to measure money? Well, there is evidence that too much or too little money can 
affect economic growth, interest rates, and inflation. As a result, central banks and 
policymakers have paid close attention to the money supply as well as innovations in 
money and the payment system. In this session we will examine the relation between 
aggregate money growth and the inflation rate in the past 50 or so years.   
 

Banking and Financial Institutions 
Professor Rustom Manouchehri Irani 
18 
Money is a special asset that we use for payments. It is a subset of our wealth. We use 
it for transactions to make purchases or pay down our debts. Money is the most 
convenient way to pay for things. But of course we hold our wealth in a variety of other 
forms. We have funds in bank accounts, we invest in stocks and bonds, and we may 
own a house. We can use these other assets for payments, but these other methods 
can be more expensive. Why? Well, we first have to convert the asset into money. This 
is called liquidating the asset. Asset liquidity tells us how costly it is to convert an asset 
into money. Cash is already money, so it is the most liquid asset. Some bank accounts 
allow us to write checks or charge debit cards. These accounts work just like cash as 
we all know. We can rank all assets by their degree of liquidity.  
 

Banking and Financial Institutions 
Professor Rustom Manouchehri Irani 
19 
Cash is the most liquid asset since it can be used right away as a means of payment. 
Houses and other property such as jewelry or family air looms are valuable, but they 
might take time to sell at the right price, so they are considered the least liquid category 
of assets. Securities and savings accounts with lockup periods sit somewhere in the 
middle. We can use this asset liquidity ranking to arrive at a definition of money. There 
really is no ideal way to do it and the definition has changed over time, including only 
cash as money is probably too strict and including stocks and bonds is too loose since 
people probably don't use stocks to pay for groceries.  
 

Banking and Financial Institutions 
Professor Rustom Manouchehri Irani 
20 
 
In practice, economists work with two basic definitions of money, M1 and M2. M1 is the 
strictest definition. It includes only paper money that is in the hands of the public. That's 
in our wallets not sitting in bank vaults, as well as checking accounts at banks.  
 
M2 is a broader measure of money. It takes that M1 and adds in some savings 
accounts. The savings accounts can be located at banks or a type of mutual fund called 
a money market fund. These are highly liquid accounts, but they are not quite as 
convenient as checking accounts. For example, bank savings accounts may restrict 

Banking and Financial Institutions 
Professor Rustom Manouchehri Irani 
21 
customers to a certain number of withdrawals per month. Since savings accounts pay 
interest, households have moved their funds from M1 into M2. This means that M2 
moves more closely with economic activity, and so economists tend to focus on this 
measure.  
 
Here is some data from the Federal Reserve on monetary aggregates in April 2020. We 
have a breakdown into M1 and then M2. M1 includes currency plus checking accounts. 
M2 is the whole pie, so it adds in the savings accounts. As you can see, if we just 
focused on currency as our measure of money, then we miss a big part of the picture. 
That's why economists prefer to look at M2.   
 

Banking and Financial Institutions 
Professor Rustom Manouchehri Irani 
22 
Let's now introduce the concept of inflation. Inflation captures the rate at which prices 
increase over time. With high inflation, we must spend more dollar bills to buy the same 
basket of goods as last month. Put differently, with high inflation, money becomes less 
valuable. The consumer price index or CPI is the most commonly used measure of the 
inflation rate. It measures changes in the price of the same basket of goods and 
services: food, housing, cell phones, and so on, over some fixed period of time. In 
January 2021, the 12 months CPI in the United States was about 1.4 percent. This 
means that I would pay $101.40 to buy the same basket of goods that cost me exactly 
$100 to buy one year prior in January 2020. Growth in the CPI tells us about the 
purchasing power of our money. In the past, there have been several episodes of very 
high inflation. Germany in 1923, the daily inflation rate was 21 percent. This meant that 
prices doubled every three days. We saw similar outcomes in Hungary in 1946, 
Zimbabwe in 2008, and Venezuela in 2018. Why does this happen? The usual 
observation is that the government finances its deficits by increasing the money supply, 
by forcing the central bank to print money to pay for its spending.  
 

Banking and Financial Institutions 
Professor Rustom Manouchehri Irani 
23 
These periods of very high money growth are then followed by periods of very high 
inflation. When there is more and more money chasing a fixed number of goods, money 
becomes less valuable, terrible, dire outcomes for households and businesses usually 
follow. The experience in the United States in the 20th century at least has never been 
that bad.  
 
Here is a plot showing monthly CPI growth from 1950 to present. Inflation has generally 

Banking and Financial Institutions 
Professor Rustom Manouchehri Irani 
24 
been below five percent except in the 1970s and 80s when inflation exceeded 10 
percent. This period has been called The Great Inflation.   
 
At this point, we're going to take two steps. First, let's use our monetary aggregates to 
examine whether money supply grew before the Great Inflation. Second, let's see if our 
monetary aggregates can forecast inflation in the 21st century. Here is the relation 
between inflation and money growth from 1960 until 1980. Inflation is measured using 
the CPI, money growth is measured using M2. Money growth is lagged two years to 
make sure we get the timing correct. Does money growth in 1960 have an association 
with inflation in 1962? And so on. In the graph, each red dot represents a month. This 
red dot here represents April 1980. At this point in time the inflation rate was around 15 
percent and the money growth rate from two years prior was around eight percent. The 
fitted line shows a positive association between money growth and inflation. Periods of 
high money growth are associated with high inflation two years later. Periods of low 
money growth are associated with low inflation also two years later. This fits our 
intuition. But the story doesn't end there.  
 

Banking and Financial Institutions 
Professor Rustom Manouchehri Irani 
25 
 
If we, instead, focus on the post 2000 period, we lose the correlation between growth 
rates in M2 and the CPI. M2 is no longer useful for predicting inflation in the 21st 
century. Why is this the case? There are two potential explanations. First, the relation 
between money growth and inflation does not show up in a low inflation environment. 
You may have noticed that after the year 2000, the inflation rate is hovering around two 
percent. That is abnormally low by historical standards. The second possibility is that 
M2 is no longer an accurate measure of money. In the 21st century, there are much 
lower transaction costs in financial markets, credit cards are widespread, and new 
digital payment technologies are popping up every day. The way we use money and 
make payments has changed quite a bit, and so perhaps we need a new measure of 
money.  
 

Banking and Financial Institutions 
Professor Rustom Manouchehri Irani 
26 
Let's wrap up. In this session, we went from the concept of money to its measurement 
at the economy wide scale. We used these monetary aggregates to try to understand 
the relation between money growth and inflation. During The Great Inflation of the 
1970s and 80s, we saw that money growth was also elevated. Finally, in the 21st 
century, we saw this relationship became murky. This raises questions about how we 
should measure money in the future. It also cast doubts on whether past approaches by 
governments and central banks to control inflation will be effective in the future. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Banking and Financial Institutions 
Professor Rustom Manouchehri Irani 
27 
Lesson 1-2: The Financial System 
Lesson 1-2.1: What Does the Financial System Do? 
 
In this session, we will discuss at a very high level what the financial system does. We 
will begin by introducing borrowers and savers. We will then examine how funds flow 
through the financial system and how these funds are exchanged for financial 
instruments.  
 

Banking and Financial Institutions 
Professor Rustom Manouchehri Irani 
28 
 
Our starting point is an economic agent that has a funding need. This could be a 
business with a profitable investment opportunity. Now, this business could dip into its 
cash reserves or even sell assets to fund this new investment. However, these internal 
funds might not be enough. In this case, it might make sense for the business to be a 
borrower and raise external funds from savers.  
 
Here are our savers and our borrowers. Borrowers can be just about anyone. 
Households that need funds to buy a house or something at the shops. The business 

Banking and Financial Institutions 
Professor Rustom Manouchehri Irani 
29 
that I just mentioned may have a short-term working capital need or require longer-term 
funding to expand operations. Farmers might need money to buy tractors. And, of 
course, the government might need to borrow to fund public goods.  
 
Savers are mostly households with more income than current spending needs. The 
savings can be put towards retirement. This often happens through a pension fund or a 
taxable mutual fund. They can be put in a bank, which is also useful for managing cash. 
Rather than spending more today, households can save for a rainy day by buying 
insurance.   
 

Banking and Financial Institutions 
Professor Rustom Manouchehri Irani 
30 
Now here comes the financial system. At a very high level, and this might sound weird, 
the financial system connects savers and borrowers. By connecting them, the financial 
system channels savings to meet the funding need of the borrowers. The end game 
here is economic prosperity. The financial system channels resources to their most 
efficient uses, and this leads to economic growth. In exchange for their funds, savers 
receive these financial instruments. Let's talk about them in more detail.  
 
 

Banking and Financial Institutions 
Professor Rustom Manouchehri Irani 
31 
A financial instrument is basically a formal commitment to repay. I give you some 
money. You have to repay me next week. We can be more precise. It is a legally 
binding obligation that courts and governments will enforce if something goes wrong. It 
requires that funds are transferred between participants under certain circumstances. I 
am repaid fixed amounts on certain dates. I am paid a lump sum if I accidentally crash 
my car and so on. That's quite abstract so let's consider some examples that we all 
know.  
 
Let's start with the savers. We are all familiar with a bank deposit account. As a saver, 
we put our cash in the bank. These funds are redeemable on demand. This means we 
can get our cashback whenever we want. Bank deposits are also safe and convenient. 
Instead of paper money, we can use checks, or debit cards, or mobile banking to make 
payments. With a mutual fund share, I exchange my money for a share in an investment 
portfolio. This helps me store and maybe even grow my wealth into the future. 
Insurance is another form of saving. Let's say I'm worried about a car accident. What 
can I do? I give up some spending today and pay an insurance premium, and then in 
the bad state of the world when I crash my car, I get a payout. This insurance payout 
covers the cost of fixing my car. Insurance is a type of financial instrument that allows 
our savers to transfer risk.  
 

Banking and Financial Institutions 
Professor Rustom Manouchehri Irani 
32 
What types of financial instruments do borrowers use? Equity. A business owner can 
sell shares. This will pull in funds today. The buyer of the equity now has a stake in the 
firm. This entitles the buyer to a share in the future profits of that firm.  
 
When we think of borrowing, we usually think of debt, bonds, bank loans, mortgages. 
Here a borrower usually gets a lump sum today and then promises to repay in the 
future. The payments are usually fixed amounts that happen on fixed dates. That's why 
these financial instruments are sometimes called fixed income. Government bonds used 

Banking and Financial Institutions 
Professor Rustom Manouchehri Irani 
33 
to have coupons attached to them that could be torn off and redeemed at a local bank 
for a cash payment. There can be strings attached. With a residential mortgage, that's 
when you get a loan to buy a house. The borrower usually posts the land and the house 
as collateral.  
 
These are all financial instruments. They are all invention, sometimes called innovations 
of the financial system.  
 

Banking and Financial Institutions 
Professor Rustom Manouchehri Irani 
34 
You might be thinking, why do we have so many financial instruments? Well, they are 
tailored to meet the demands of savers and borrowers. As savers, we value convenient 
ways to store and grow our wealth. Just hanging onto money probably doesn't make 
sense for most of us. We may also be afraid of some adverse events and wants to buy 
insurance. Borrowers want long-term funding. They might be happy to raise money by 
issuing debt. Some business owners might prefer to cash out by selling equity instead. 
 
Let's sum up. The financial system sits between our savers who have funds to spare 
and our borrowers who have an investment need. The financial system channels those 

Banking and Financial Institutions 
Professor Rustom Manouchehri Irani 
35 
funds from the savers to the borrowers. It exchanges funds for financial instruments. 
These financial instruments are designed to meet the needs of savers and borrowers. 
 
 

Banking and Financial Institutions 
Professor Rustom Manouchehri Irani 
36 
Lesson 1-2.2: Financial Markets Versus Financial Institutions 
 
In this session, we will discuss how funds flow through the financial system. We will 
introduce and characterize financial markets, we will then explain what financial 
institutions are and how they add value. To keep things simple, we will focus on a bank. 
 
The financial system channels funds from savers to borrowers in exchange for financial 
instruments. But who or what is this financial system? That's what we are going to work 
on right now. It turns out that there are two ways that funds flow through the financial 

Banking and Financial Institutions 
Professor Rustom Manouchehri Irani 
37 
system, either directly through access to financial markets or indirectly via financial 
institutions. In both cases, borrowers receive their funds and savers receive their 
financial instruments, but what's interesting is just how that exchange takes place and 
who is involved. 
 
 
Let's start with financial markets. How can a saver participate directly in financial 
markets? Well, let's say you wanted to buy a share of Apple. Typically you will not buy 
the share from the company itself. Instead you would buy the share from another 
investor on the New York Stock Exchange.  
 

Banking and Financial Institutions 
Professor Rustom Manouchehri Irani 
38 
That's why we denote Apple with this ticker symbol. This type of transaction is what we 
call direct exchange via financial markets. On the direct exchange parts, while we say 
direct exchange, this type of transaction will usually be executed with the help of a 
financial firm called a broker or a dealer. For a fee, a broker will find your trading 
partner, on the other hand, but still for a fee a dealer will act as your trading partner 
selling you a financial instrument that they carry in their inventory. Nowadays most of 
this interaction happens electronically. For example, you may have heard of E*Trade. 
This is an online trading platform that offers both broker and dealer services for retail  
investors like you or me. There are many types of financial markets. We classify them in 
terms of the type of financial instrument that can be bought or sold. For example, stock 
or equity markets are where the shares of businesses are traded. Debt markets involve 
loans, mortgages or corporate bonds. Money markets are where short-term bonds. 
Those with maturity less than one year can be bought or sold. To make this concrete, 
when Apple wants to fund its operations, it can borrow by selling equity long-term bonds 
or short-term bonds known as commercial paper. After issuance, the equity will be 
traded in a stock market, the long-term bonds will be traded in a bond market and the 
commercial paper will be traded in a money market. We all know that well-functioning 
financial markets play a central role in modern economies.  
 

Banking and Financial Institutions 
Professor Rustom Manouchehri Irani 
39 
Countries with the largest and most active markets all show three qualities. First, low 
transaction costs. It is cheap for borrowers to issue securities and it is also cheap for 
investors to trade among themselves. Second, market participants should be allowed to 
collect, process and communicate information about borrowers. This will ensure that 
market prices accurately reflect potential risks and returns. When prices are accurate, 
resources will flow to their best use. Third, investor protection. Here I don't mean that 
investors are protected against losses if an investment doesn't work out. No. I mean that 
savers need to be confident that borrowers will not rip them off. Financial instruments 
are legally binding commitments to repay and modern financial markets require 
regulators and courts to enforce contracts. When investors are protected against 
abuses, they will be happy to invest.  
 

Banking and Financial Institutions 
Professor Rustom Manouchehri Irani 
40 
 
Next, let's introduce financial institutions. Our goal here is to understand what financial 
institutions are and how they add value over and above financial markets. 
 
Financial institutions are firms that channel funds from savers to borrowers. How do 
they do this? Well, they first raise funds from the savers. They take those savings and 
usually provide a short-term liability in exchange. They then take those funds that 
they've raised from the savers and they send them to the borrowers. By this, I mean the 
financial institution will invest in financial instruments issued by the borrower. At the end 

Banking and Financial Institutions 
Professor Rustom Manouchehri Irani 
41 
of the day, we still have funds being sent from savers to borrowers but as you can see 
there is this extra step in the process. This is quite abstract and I'm going to make it 
concrete in a second, but one final point, a key difference between these financial 
institutions and the brokers and the dealers mentioned before is that these financial 
institutions have balance sheets and often make long-term investments. The brokers 
merely connect savers and borrowers.  
 
 
Let's work through the classic example of a financial institution. If you can follow this, 
then you are in great shape. How does this process work at its simplified bank? I am the 
saver, I put $1,000 of my savings in a bank in exchange for a deposit contract. The 
deposit contract is a liability of the bank. It owes me $1,000 on-demand or whenever I 
want it back. The bank does this many times over, it pulls one million dollars in savings. 
 

Banking and Financial Institutions 
Professor Rustom Manouchehri Irani 
42 
Next, the bank identifies a credit worthy business and lends that business one million 
dollars as a long-term business loan. That business loan is an asset of the bank. The 
business owes the bank one million dollars. Putting this together, our bank has 
channeled funds from savers to borrowers. Perhaps less obvious, the bank has created 
a balance sheet along the way, a one million dollar loan funded by one million dollars of 
deposits.  
 

Banking and Financial Institutions 
Professor Rustom Manouchehri Irani 
43 
 
Why do we need financial institutions? What is the point? We know that financial 
markets and say banks co-exist, so there must be good reasons to have both. 
Economists have identified at least three problems that financial institutions help to 
solve. First, maturity mismatch, second, price risk, and third, information asymmetry. 
 
 
Let's stick with banks for now and unpack these points. The first issue savers and 
borrowers would run into is what we call maturity mismatch. On the one hand, 
borrowers typically want long-term funding, home buyers want mortgages for 15 or 30 

Banking and Financial Institutions 
Professor Rustom Manouchehri Irani 
44 
years, corporations want funding for projects with long payback periods and on the 
other hand as savers, we want easy access to our funds and even value payment 
services. We most certainly do not want all of our money locked up for long periods of 
time. How do banks help to resolve this mismatch in needs? Well, they simply issue 
deposits that are redeemable on-demand and grant loans that are long-term.  
 
Next up is the observation that stocks and bonds might not be the most stable store of 
value. Prices of stocks bounce around from day to day, the fees or bid-ask spread 
associated with trading might be volatile as well. When we invest in financial markets, 
these are usually the first issues that come to mind. Some savers might find price risk 
very off-putting and prefer just to hold cash instead. How do banks help here? Well, 
once again we can think of the deposit contract. It is both super convenient and also 
very safe. I put a dollar in the bank today and in a world with deposit insurance provided 
by the government, I will be able to withdraw at least one dollar tomorrow. There might 
be some fees associated with bank accounts but at least there is zero price risk.  
 

Banking and Financial Institutions 
Professor Rustom Manouchehri Irani 
45 
Final point and this is a big one, savers might have a tough time evaluating the risk and 
expected returns on investments. How much will the investment payoff? What is the 
likelihood of failure? How big is my loss in the event of default? 
 
Here is an interesting case study. Zano, the baby drone, sounds like a really cool idea, 
a baby drone for selfies. Investors certainly agreed back in 2015 this award winning 
idea was Europe's most successful crowd-funded project. It had raised over two million 
dollars of funding for more than 12,000 investors on the Kick-starter platform. 
Unfortunately, it did not work out. Despite promises, only about 600 drones were 

Banking and Financial Institutions 
Professor Rustom Manouchehri Irani 
46 
produced that could not fly and the parent company declared bankruptcy. Many of the 
investors ended up with absolutely nothing. What do we learn from this case? Well, it 
can be tough for individual investors to first select successful businesses and second 
minimize losses when things go bad. 
  
There are, of course, market-based solutions to these information problems. Equity 
research analysts forecast earnings, credit ratings agencies rate bonds, you can even 
buy bond insurance to guard against potential losses. However, if information risks are 
too large then some households might prefer not to invest. This creates a role for our 
bank, who can meet this information risks head on. Banks are experts at screening and 
evaluating borrowers, banks monitor borrowers after granting loans and banks stop 
lending to borrowers that are not performing well.  
 

Banking and Financial Institutions 
Professor Rustom Manouchehri Irani 
47 
 
Let's summarize what we've just covered. The financial system moves funds from 
savers to borrowers and it does so through one of two channels, first, directly via 
financial markets.  
 
In 
this case, a broker usually helps connect investors that can trade with each other. That 
way a saver can purchase securities issued by a corporation or the government. 
Second, funds are moved indirectly with the help of financial institutions. We have 

Banking and Financial Institutions 
Professor Rustom Manouchehri Irani 
48 
argued that financial institutions can add value by solving maturity mismatch, price risk 
and finally information problems. 
 
 

Banking and Financial Institutions 
Professor Rustom Manouchehri Irani 
49 
Lesson 1-2.3: Banks Versus Non-Banks 
 
In this session, we will describe how the US financial industry is organized. We will 
introduce the most important bank and non-bank financial institutions and explain their 
roles in the economy.  
 
The modern financial industry consists of financial markets and financial institutions.  
 

Banking and Financial Institutions 
Professor Rustom Manouchehri Irani 
50 
Some firms offer brokerage services that connect savers and borrowers directly in 
financial markets. Other financial firms, we have been calling them financial institutions, 
raise funds from savers and use the proceeds to invest in a variety of financial 
instruments: stocks, loans, bonds, and real estate, these financial institutions 
have balance sheets.  
 
Our goal in this session is to identify and characterize the most important financial 
institutions. Who are they? What are their unique economic functions? How do they 

Banking and Financial Institutions 
Professor Rustom Manouchehri Irani 
51 
raise funds? Where do they deploy these funds? Put differently. What do their balance 
sheets look like? And finally, which of these institutions matter most in terms of market 
share?  
  
Let's open up the financial institutions box. We first make the distinction between banks 
and non-banks. Banks are the financial institutions that we interact with on a day-to-day 
basis. These include commercial banks, savings institutions, and credit unions. In 
different countries there are other types of banks. But they all do the same thing, they 
collect deposits from savers and grant loans to borrowers.  
Banks are not the whole story here, we are going to see that non-banks play an 
important role and their presence has undoubtedly being increasing. What is a non-
bank? Well, at a first pass, these are financial institutions that do not take deposits. The 
key types in the United States in terms of assets under management include insurance 
companies, pension funds, securities firms, finance companies, and government-
sponsored enterprises. This is a very big umbrella and these institutions are very 
different. They have varied funding profiles, varied investment profiles, and the 
underlying economics of why these institution exists also varies greatly.   

Banking and Financial Institutions 
Professor Rustom Manouchehri Irani 
52 
Let's start with banks. We have commercial banks, savings and loans institutions and 
credit unions they all play a similar role in finance and their balance sheets reflect this. 
They raise funds primarily from retail customers. These are savers like you and me in 
the form of deposit accounts. These are our bank accounts. Some large banks also 
borrow in-debt markets. You may have heard of the interbank market or the repo 
market. How did they use these funds? Well banks mostly invest in loans. In fact, banks 
are the primary originators of loans in the economy. Banks decide which households get 
a mortgage, the size of the loan, and the interest rate. What makes bank special? Why 
do we like banks? Well, banks are a combination of businesses. Depositors – that's us. 
we get bank accounts that are safe, convenient, and offer access to the payment 
system. Banks themselves pull our savings, in fact, large amounts of small savings and 
make loans to creditworthy borrowers. Finding those credit worthy borrowers and 
granting them loans is what we mean by origination. 
 

Banking and Financial Institutions 
Professor Rustom Manouchehri Irani 
53 
 
Banks also trade in financial markets on behalf of their customers. This allows us to 
diversify our risks and manage our wealth into the future. Let's take a look at some 
recent data from the World Bank. We can calculate the size of domestic securities 
markets. This is stock market capitalization plus the total value of outstanding bonds 
and compare this with total loans outstanding. This comparison will give us a rough 
sense of the relative importance of banks, since banks grant the bulk of loans, as 
compared with securities markets all around the world.  
 

Banking and Financial Institutions 
Professor Rustom Manouchehri Irani 
54 
Here is the data for the United States, Europe, and two Asian economies over the past 
quarter century. What are the key takeaways? First, in all of these economies, both 
securities and loan markets are important. This means that banks are highly relevant 
which is probably not surprising to you. Second, there are a lot of differences around the 
world. In the United States, finance is less dependent on banks whereas in China, the 
reverse is true. Moving onto our non-banks. First fact. Non-banks are not funded by 
government in short deposits. This is probably the loosest definition that I can offer.  
 

Banking and Financial Institutions 
Professor Rustom Manouchehri Irani 
55 
These non-banks perform many of the same economic functions as regular banks. They 
can provide a safe and convenient way to store wealth. They channel pools of small 
savings to borrower, they minimize information costs associated with investments, and 
some of them allow customers to reduce risk. There is a vast ecosystem of non-banks 
from peer-to-peer lenders to pawn brokers to private equity firms and of course we have 
the rise of Fintech in recent times. 
 
 

Banking and Financial Institutions 
Professor Rustom Manouchehri Irani 
56 
Lesson 1-2.4: Overview of Non-Banks 
We are going to focus our attention on the most important non-banks in the United 
States in terms of assets under management. First off insurance companies. The 
economic function of insurance is risk mitigation. From my perspective, it is a form of 
saving for a rainy day. I transfer the risk of some adverse event to an insurance 
company. I pay a premium. And then in the bad state of the world, I make a claim and 
the insurance company pays out. From the insurer standpoint, payouts become 
predictable as they write more and more and more policies. There are many insurance 
markets, but the two most common are life and property and casualty. With life 
insurance I'm protecting against the potential loss of earnings from disability or death.  
 

Banking and Financial Institutions 
Professor Rustom Manouchehri Irani 
57 
My favorite example of life insurance is Scottish widows. This was a policy set up in the 
19th century in Edinburgh, Scotland, to provide income to the families of men serving in 
the Napoleonic wars should they die in service. Property and casualty insurance 
protects households and businesses from losses due to natural events. You can think of 
floods and fires or due to accidents.  
 
 
A good example is a car accident. What may be surprising is that these insurance 
premier are pulled and invested. My saving for a rainy day is channeled to borrowers. 

Banking and Financial Institutions 
Professor Rustom Manouchehri Irani 
58 
More precisely, the source of funds for an insurance company consists of pulled premia. 
Insurance companies use these funds to make payouts on insurance claims. However, 
they also make long term investments in stocks and real estate and bonds. You might 
not have known that insurance companies are among the biggest investors in US 
corporate bonds.  
 
 
Next we have pension funds. Pension funds are used to store and grow our wealth into 
the future.   
 

Banking and Financial Institutions 
Professor Rustom Manouchehri Irani 
59 
 
Households can save for retirement beginning at a young age and often in a way that is 
pre-committed. In my case, some 8% of my paycheck is set aside whether I like it or 
not. Retirement savings accounts usually offer some tax benefit, such as a deferral of 
income tax. Sometimes employers make contributions to these accounts. Once I reach 
retirement, I receive a payout from the fund usually in the form of a lump sum or a life 
annuity. Pension funds sourced their funds by pulling employee and employer 
contributions, and then the pension fund uses these funds two ways. It makes long term 
investments primarily in bonds, stocks and real estates. At the same time, it manages 
these investments to make payouts to retirees. Pension funds and life insurance 
companies are in a very similar line of business. Pension funds make payouts if you 
make it to retirement, whereas life insurance payout if you do not. Sorry if that sounds a 
bit morbid. Given these similarities these businesses tend to make the same 
investments. We also see the larger life insurance companies managing pension funds 
and vice versa.  
 

Banking and Financial Institutions 
Professor Rustom Manouchehri Irani 
60 
There are two main types of securities firms. First, we have investment banks. While 
commercial banks decide which households get mortgages and at what interest rates, 
investment banks decide which firms can issue securities and capital markets and on 
what terms.  
 
Underwriting is the bread and butter of investment banking. Let's say a corporation 
wants to issue some securities. The investment bank will commit to purchasing the 

Banking and Financial Institutions 
Professor Rustom Manouchehri Irani 
61 
entire issue at some price. It will then place the issue with outside investors shortly after, 
hopefully at a higher price and yielding some profit. 
 
Taking a step back, investment banks have to economic functions. First, they are in the 
business of collecting and processing information about potential borrowers. They act 
as gatekeepers for capital markets. Second, they connect savers and borrowers 
through the underwriting process.  
 

Banking and Financial Institutions 
Professor Rustom Manouchehri Irani 
62 
 
Investment funds are very different. They pull savings and make investments in large 
diversified portfolios of assets. This allows investors to store and grow their wealth into 
the future. There is a wide variety of mutual funds and exchange traded funds that serve 
this purpose. Retail investors can access these funds with minimum investment 
requirements and low transaction fees. They have a variety of investment profiles. 
Money market funds only invest in super safe and short term bonds. Equity mutual 
funds are riskier. The polling part is very important. Vanguard, which is one of the 
largest mutual fund families, will offer a mutual fund that tracks the S&P 500 with a 
minimum investment of $3,000. It would be very challenging to replicate this investment 
without their help. Hedge funds are an infamous class of investment fund. They cater to 
wealthy and sophisticated investors only. A hedge fund can either have 99 investors, 
each with a net worth in excess of $1 million dollars or 499 Investors worth more than 
$5 million dollars apiece. Avoiding uninformed retail investors, that's you or me allows 
hedge funds to sidestep certain regulations. This means hedge funds can pursue high 
risk, high reward investment strategies across securities and derivatives markets and 
face very little scrutiny.  
 

Banking and Financial Institutions 
Professor Rustom Manouchehri Irani 
63 
 
Next, we have finance companies. These financial institutions look a lot like banks. Only 
they cater to a specific loan market. Some focus on consumer credit, which is credit for 
household purchases. This could be a mortgage to buy a house, an installment loan for 
an appliance like a fridge or a washing machine, or an auto loan to buy a car. For 
example, the Ford Motor Credit Company finances car sales. Other finance companies 
specialize in business lending. This could be anything from financing and aircraft 
purchase to providing a lease for farm equipment. Finance companies act a lot like 
banks, but with a specific industry focus. Granting loans and leases is their primary 
activity just like banks and they minimize information costs by screening and monitoring 
borrowers. However, they're not banks, and their fundraising activities reflect this. 
Finance companies are not funded with deposits. They are instead funded with bonds 
and bank loans.  
 

Banking and Financial Institutions 
Professor Rustom Manouchehri Irani 
64 
Our final major class of non-bank is the government sponsored enterprise, or GSE. 
These are key players in the United States mortgage market. Who am I talking about? 
Well, there are three financial institutions here. The Federal National Mortgage 
Association, also known as Fannie Mae. Fannie was established In the 1930s, the 
Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corporation. This guy is Freddie Mac and it arrived on 
the scene in 1968. Finally, we have Ginnie Mae or the Government National Mortgage 
Corporation, which also arrived in 1968. All of these financial institutions were 
established by the US government. Ginnie is wholly owned by the government. Fannie 
and Freddie are private corporations, although since they were established by the 
government to serve the public good, they have been dubbed GSEs that is government 
sponsored enterprises. The GSEs support home ownership in the United States, 
especially among lower income and underserved communities. This includes loans for 
low cost housing or loans to army veterans. The GSEs achieved this by subsidizing 
mortgage interest rates. This happens either through direct lending at below market 
rates or by guaranteeing repayment on certain real estate financial instruments issued 
by other financial institutions. These guarantees act a lot like insurance, which makes 
these subsidized loans less risky. Putting this together, the GSEs raise funds by issuing 
bonds or selling loan guarantees to other financial institutions. And they use these funds 
two ways. First and primarily, they grant mortgages. Second, they make insurance 
payouts related to their loan guarantees.  
 

Banking and Financial Institutions 
Professor Rustom Manouchehri Irani 
65 
 
Okay, we have covered the major financial institutions in the United States. Our final 
task is to examine the relative importance of these institutions. To do this, we will look at 
data from the US flow of funds. These data are collected and processed by the Federal 
Reserve. They contain estimates of the asset holdings of banks and the major groups of 
non-banks. We are going to examine two different time periods. 1970 or as I like to call 
it, ancient history and 2018, which is more or less today. What do we see? Well, two 
things stand out. First, the declining share of banks among these financial institutions. In 
1970 banks funded more than half of all assets. By 2018 this had declined to less than 
25%. Insurance companies also experienced a decline. Who stepped in? Clearly mutual 
funds. Their share of assets has increased from less than 5% to more than 30%. This 
reflects the increased access to low cost index investing through products offered by 
Vanguard and other investment funds.  
 

Banking and Financial Institutions 
Professor Rustom Manouchehri Irani 
66 
Let's sum up, financial institutions channel funds from savers to borrowers. There are 
many bank and non-bank financial institutions involved in this process. We have 
characterized these institutions in terms of their key economic functions and balance 
sheets. Data indicate that banks play an important role in financing around the world. In 
the U.S., however, non-banks especially mutual funds seem to have become prominent 
in the recent years. At this point, we have not discussed any potential implications. 
Good or bad of this reallocation. That is for another time. 
 
 

Banking and Financial Institutions 
Professor Rustom Manouchehri Irani 
67 
Lesson 1-3: Finance and the Real Economy 
Lesson 1-3.1: Financial Development and Economic Activity 
Money and finance are central to a well-functioning economy. In this session, we will 
provide evidence that greater financial development leads to better economic outcomes 
for society. We will then argue that it's not always smooth sailing. Sometimes there can 
be disruptions within the financial system. This can occur when investors lose faith in 
financial institutions or when financial innovations are too rapid and go unchecked by 
markets or regulators. In the second part of this session, we will introduce the idea of 
a financial crisis and discuss how these events can be costly for society.  
 

Banking and Financial Institutions 
Professor Rustom Manouchehri Irani 
68 
 
A well-functioning economy depends on money and the payment system.  
 
The financial system, which involves financial market and a broad array of bank and 
non-bank financial institutions, channels funds from savers to borrowers. This promotes 
investment. Our belief is that greater financial development means more accurate 
market price and more efficient allocation of resources and better risk sharing.  
 

Banking and Financial Institutions 
Professor Rustom Manouchehri Irani 
69 
You put all of that together and we should see faster economic growth and better 
outcomes for society. We can test this idea using recent data from the World Bank. We 
can look across the globe and check whether countries with larger financial systems 
have better economic outcomes. To measure financial development, we can take the 
total amount of credit extended to the private sector. We have to scale credit by GDP so 
that our observations across countries are comparable. We then focus on GDP per 
capita, as a measure of economic development.  
 

Banking and Financial Institutions 
Professor Rustom Manouchehri Irani 
70 
The scatter plot seems to confirm our intuition. We can see that countries with larger 
financial systems tend to have higher incomes per citizen. That's great news. And it 
suggests that we want to have more and more financial development, more and more 
banks, more financial markets and possibly fewer restrictions on these institutions, 
right? If you're a policy maker, then you should prioritize the financial sector above 
many other things. But surely there is a limiting principle here.  
 
 
Well, it's hard to say financial without saying financial crisis. Throughout history, we 

Banking and Financial Institutions 
Professor Rustom Manouchehri Irani 
71 
have seen episodes like this. A depression era bank in the 1930s, with customers 
queuing up hoping to withdraw their life savings.  
 
Northern Rock, a Bank in England, where I grew up, experienced a similar run on its 
deposits in the fall of 2007. This was an early warning sign that a financial crisis was on 
its way. Whether it's the Great Depression or Great Recession, we seem to hear the 
same narrative. In a first step, excesses within the financial system cause a panic. 
Savings are withdrawn from financial institutions, and then these institutions are forced 
to liquidate investments.  
 

Banking and Financial Institutions 
Professor Rustom Manouchehri Irani 
72 
Eventually financial markets such as the stock market crash. Then in a second step, this 
financial crisis causes a terrible burden on the economy. Households lose their savings, 
and they can no longer access credit. Businesses fail. All of this translates into a deep 
and long lasting recession. Banks were central to the original version of this story.  
 
Since 1793 panics have occurred in the United States. In the following years, 1797, 
1811, 1813, 1816 and so on and so on. 1873, 1894, 1890, 1893. The true name for a 
system with this record is the panic system.  

Banking and Financial Institutions 
Professor Rustom Manouchehri Irani 
73 
The panic of 1907 was the first worldwide financial crisis of the 20th century. These 
banking panics peaked during the Great Depression of the 1930s Between 1930 and 
1933, about 2000 banks failed per year. This was probably the worst global financial 
crisis in modern history. It led to the creation of our current system of government 
deposit insurance provided by the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, or FDIC. 100 
years later, financial crisis still involve panicky investors.  
 
Let's start with Securitization. It is one of the great financial innovations of the 20th 

Banking and Financial Institutions 
Professor Rustom Manouchehri Irani 
74 
century. It allows financial engineers to take pools of risky loans and create new asset 
backed securities or ABS. Some of these ABS are rated Triple A, so we have 
transformed risk into safety.   
 
However, the process itself is complex and opaque, so it can be hard for many investors 
to understand. Beginning in 2007, some of the riskiest mortgage backed securities. You 
may have heard of subprime mortgages before they started to default. Investors didn't 
think that was possible, and they panicked. The panic spread to all securitization 
markets, including student loans and credit card securitizations that had absolutely 
nothing to do with mortgages. There was a near total collapse in credit, money market 
funds. They have been central to financial panics in the 21st century. They are a type of 
mutual fund that makes super safe investments in short term bond markets. Large 
institutional investors park cash at these funds to earn some returns, small returns, but 
better than nothing. Here's the fun part. These funds structure their liabilities to 
resemble bank deposits. They appear riskless and can be redeemed on demand. But 
savings in money market funds are not insured by the government and may be subject 
to losses. In 2008, when losses derive at one very famous fund, you probably don't 
know it, but that fund was called the Reserve Primary Fund. This was totally 
unexpected. Investors panicked and the entire money fund industry experienced mass 
withdrawals and was brought to the brink of collapse. Problems can stem from the 
money and payment system, too. Hyperinflation in Weimar, Germany in the 1920s, 
Hungary in 46, Zimbabwe in 2008, Venezuela in 2018. These are extreme examples.  
 

Banking and Financial Institutions 
Professor Rustom Manouchehri Irani 
75 
 
In each case, governments issued too much paper money. The paper money was 
eventually deemed worthless. The outcomes for the economy and society as a whole 
were truly dreadful.  
 
 
Digital currencies break government control over the supply of paper money. However, 
since the emergence of Bitcoin in 2008, they have looked more like a speculative 
bubble than a reliable means of payment. One point of view is that so long as price risks 
are dispersed among retail investors, then it probably doesn't matter if the value of 
digital currencies rise or fall. It is a problem for the investors, but not a threat to the 

Banking and Financial Institutions 
Professor Rustom Manouchehri Irani 
76 
financial system and the broader economy. Stable coins are not the same as Bitcoin. 
Stable coins are a special type of digital currency that peg their value to a regular 
currency. Tether is the most popular stable coin. As of 2021, Tether has issued more 
than $60 billion dollars’ worth of digital tokens, and those digital tokens are redeemable 
for a dollar apiece. These stable coins can be used to pay for things, and they have 
value because they can be exchanged for dollars. You might not know this, but Tether 
actually invests the funds it raises by selling these digital tokens. Where? Well, from 
what we can gather it invest the dollars it collects in securities such as commercial 
paper. As of 2021, Tether had about $30 billion dollars’ worth of commercial paper 
investments, making it essentially one of the biggest money market funds in the world. 
What's going to happen if investors lose faith in Tether and redeem their digital tokens 
on mass? Well, if some investors panic and worry they might not be able to get $1 per 
token, then they might be willing to accept 90 cents or something less. This could lead 
to a run on Tether, and the value of the digital currency could fall immediately. A panic 
of this sort could disrupt the entire stable coin market. Worse yet, and this is why it 
matters, this disruption could spill over to the commercial paper market. This could 
affect how governments and businesses finance their working capital. It sounds like 
some digital currencies might be more problematic than others.  
 
 
When the financial system fails, time and time again, we have seen the government 
step in and provide support. This action is usually called a government bailout. In the 
United States, the various government agencies spent more than 600 billion dollars of 
taxpayer money during and after the 2008 financial crisis. That is a large sum, but the 
U.S. is also a very big economy. It can afford to spend that much money provided the 

Banking and Financial Institutions 
Professor Rustom Manouchehri Irani 
77 
intervention succeeds, of course. Thankfully, it more or less worked out back in 2008. 
Other governments cannot support bailouts of that magnitude.  
 
 
This chart shows the largest bank bailouts in recent history. We scale the size of the 
bailout by GDP to give us a sense of how costly it was relative to national income. In 
1997, Indonesia spent more than half of its national income bailing out banks. Bailouts 
of that magnitude can lead to a sudden collapse of government finances. All right, 
where does this leave us? There is a tradeoff. We want to promote an efficient, 
competitive financial sector. Innovations in money and finance move our economy 
forward. But we need to balance this against financial sectors stability and the risk of 
crashes.  
 

Banking and Financial Institutions 
Professor Rustom Manouchehri Irani 
78 
 
To guard against crashes, we need to set limits. First, which institutions should be 
regulated. Should regulators leave private equity and FinTech firms alone? This is an 
open question. Second, what should regulated financial institutions be allowed to do? 
Should Tether have the same disclosure requirements as banks? Should banks be 
allowed to have hedge funds subsidiaries? Should we allow those hedge funds 
subsidiaries to invest in Bitcoin? Finally, what sorts of government interventions are 
appropriate during financial crises? Our intuition is that it's sometimes appropriate to bail 
out failing institutions. But how should limits be set? These are important public policy 
questions. 
 
