Technology Strategy 
Professor Rustom Manouchehri Irani  
1 
Module 3: Banking and Financial Institutions 
Table of Contents 
Module 3: Banking and Financial Institutions .......................................................................... 1 
Module 3: Information ..................................................................................................................... 2 
Lesson 3-0: Overview ........................................................................................................................................... 2 
Lesson 3-1: Bank Capital and Profitability ......................................................................................... 3 
Lesson 3-1.1: Bank Equity Capital ........................................................................................................................ 3 
Lesson 3-1.2: Measuring Bank Performance ..................................................................................................... 10 
Lesson 3-2: Overview of Bank Risks and Risk Management ............................................................ 18 
Lesson 3-2.1: Overview of Risk .......................................................................................................................... 18 
Lesson 3-2.2: Credit Risk .................................................................................................................................... 25 
Lesson 3-2.3: Interest Rate Risk ......................................................................................................................... 36 
Lesson 3-2.4: Liquidity Risk ................................................................................................................................ 45 
Lesson 3-2.5: Market Risk .................................................................................................................................. 54 
Lesson 3-2.6: Operational Risks ......................................................................................................................... 61 
 
 
 

Technology Strategy 
Professor Rustom Manouchehri Irani  
2 
Module 3: Information 
Lesson 3-0: Overview  
Hello, everyone and welcome to module three of financial institutions. This module is called risk 
and return. In this module, we are going to focus on the sources of profit at modern banks and 
the various risks surrounding these profits. We will begin by unpacking how banks make a profit. 
We will then describe how to measure bank performance and how the profits at banks flow to 
the owners. Profits are great but the bank business model involves risks. We should care about 
risk-adjusted returns rather than just pure profits. This is what we would describe in detail in the 
second half of the module. What are the key sources of risk at modern banks and how do risk 
managers attempt to control these risks? By the end of this module, you should understand the 
risk return tradeoff at modern banks. 
 
 

Technology Strategy 
Professor Rustom Manouchehri Irani  
3 
Lesson 3-1: Bank Capital and Profitability 
Lesson 3-1.1: Bank Equity Capital 
 
We are working towards several important measures of bank performance. One key measure is 
the return on equity. This tells us about the return on investment for the owners of the bank. In 
this session we are going to backup just a little and discuss bank equity capital. First, we will 
precisely defined bank equity. Then we will discuss how equity relates to profits as well as 
losses at a bank.  
 

Technology Strategy 
Professor Rustom Manouchehri Irani  
4 
 
To fund new projects or expand operations just like any business, banks can use equity as a 
source of funding. Equity represents a share in the ownership of a bank. When a bank sells 
equity it is selling parts of itself to some outside investor. That outside investor would become a 
stockholder or a shareholder in the bank. Owning shares gives certain rights. First, in exchange 
for their investment the new shareholder would be entitled to a slice of the bank's profits. If the 
bank does well, these profits will eventually arrive in the form of dividends. On the other hand, if 
the bank runs into financial problems and is sold or shutdown, then shareholders will have a 
residual claim on the profits. Debt holders are always paid first. Shareholders get whatever is 
leftover at the end. If things are really bad, they could get wiped out. Owning shares also gives 
voting rights. This enables shareholders to influence how the bank is managed. This aspect is 
important but it's not central to the remainder of our discussion.  
 

Technology Strategy 
Professor Rustom Manouchehri Irani  
5 
 
To make things concrete, here is JPMorgan Chase in 2020. JP Morgan is a big bank with some 
$3.4 trillion of funding. Of this funding, about 280 billion comes from its equity capital. This 
consists of the paid-in-capital from the issuance of common and preferred stock. Preferred stock 
is the same as common stock but it usually receives dividend payments first. Here we can see 
the majority of JP Morgan's equity comes from retained earnings. These are profits that are not 
paid out, but instead reinvested into the business. These profits should eventually flow to the 
shareholders.  
 
Let's focus on the payout structure of equity. We will cover a very simple bank and see what 

Technology Strategy 
Professor Rustom Manouchehri Irani  
6 
happens when we close it down. This is also called liquidating the bank. I want to illustrate how 
equity works as a residual claim in normal times and in bad times. Here is our simple bank. It 
has long-term investments that are funded by short-term debt, so that's $90 of deposits, $10 of 
equity and this funds the $100 of investments.  
 
 
What do we mean by equity as a residual claim? Well, imagine we are the owners of the bank 
and we decide to shut it down today.  
 

Technology Strategy 
Professor Rustom Manouchehri Irani  
7 
We would sell off all the assets for $100. We would first pay off our debts so we would return 
$90 to the depositors and then we would keep whatever's leftover. The owners get to keep the 
residual of $10.  
 
 
Because equity is a residual claim it acts as a cushion that absorbs losses before other liability 
holders.  
 

Technology Strategy 
Professor Rustom Manouchehri Irani  
8 
 
Let's see how this works at our bank. Suppose that a recession arrives and that some of our 
borrowers are unable to keep up with their loan repayments. Some loans may default. Let's 
assume that this reduces the value of the loans from $20 to $15. How does this impact the 
funding side of the balance sheet? Well, if we close down our bank today the liability holders 
would be okay. We could sell the assets off and return their investment. However, there would 
now only be five dollars left for our shareholders. Assets minus liabilities equals five dollars. 
They are not wiped out but they took the entire hit. This is why we say equity is the first loss 
piece of the capital structure. It protects the liabilities against potential losses and this is also 
why regulators spend a lot of time thinking about leverage ratios and capital requirements at 
financial institutions. Since most bank liabilities are government-insured deposits, regulators 
would like to see as much protection as possible.  
 

Technology Strategy 
Professor Rustom Manouchehri Irani  
9 
 
Ok, let's wrap up. Bank equity capital is an important source of funding for banks. It shows up 
on the funding side of the balance sheet alongside debt. Shareholders have an ownership stake 
in the bank. This entitles them to voting rights and acclaim on profits. Equity is the residual 
claim. When assets incur losses, equity always takes the first hit. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Technology Strategy 
Professor Rustom Manouchehri Irani  
10 
Lesson 3-1.2: Measuring Bank Performance 
 
Banks raise funds from equity and debt. Some of these funds are allocated into loans and 
trading assets. These activities generate some income. Other funds may be invested in fee-
generating business lines. After interests and non-interest expense are paid, whatever is left 
over is called profits. Profits are nice in some years and not so nice in other years. The owners 
of the bank, the shareholders, have a claim on those profits. In this session, we will cover three 
important measures of bank performance: stock returns, return on assets, and return on equity. 
We will discuss how bank borrowing, which is also known as leverage, allows banks to boost 
their profits. We will take a look at these three performance measures in the context of 
JPMorgan Chase as well as the industry as a whole.  
 

Technology Strategy 
Professor Rustom Manouchehri Irani  
11 
 
When we think of performance, stock returns are usually the first thing that comes to mind. I 
invest 100 dollars in JPMorgan common stock on December 31st, 2015. JPMorgan is a publicly-
traded bank, so I can buy the stock on E-Trade or some other trading platform. Assuming that I 
hold the stock and reinvest the dividends. Then five years later, I could sell the stock for 225 
dollars. Since the bank has performed well, its stock has appreciated in value. JPMorgan has 
outperformed the KBW Bank Index which includes other US publicly traded banks. JPMorgan 
has outperformed broader indices of financial and non-financial firms as well. Are we done? 
Well, not quite. There are two issues. First, not all banks are publicly traded. Second, focusing 
on stock returns doesn't tell us much about why banks are performing well or performing poorly. 
To make progress on these two issues, we will examine the accounting performance in addition 
to these stock returns.  
 
 

Technology Strategy 
Professor Rustom Manouchehri Irani  
12 
 
Here is JPMorgan's income statement data. There are two key measures of accounting 
performance shown here and here.  
 
 
We have the return on assets, ROA, and we have the return on equity, ROE. They tell us about 
bank profits and can be calculated for any bank, publicly traded or privately held.  
 

Technology Strategy 
Professor Rustom Manouchehri Irani  
13 
 
Return on assets tells us how efficiently a bank puts its assets to use, how much after tax profit 
is generated per dollar of investments. Banks that invest in assets yielding high returns and 
minimal losses, banks that borrow at low costs, banks that run operations tightly, banks that are 
able to minimize their tax burdens. These banks will have higher after tax profits.  
 
 
There are many factors that can impact the ROA. Here we can see a couple. The overhead 
ratio measures cost control. Credit quality metrics say something about realized and potential 
losses in the loan portfolio.  
 

Technology Strategy 
Professor Rustom Manouchehri Irani  
14 
 
Bank shareholders are more interested in the return on their investment. This is given by the 
return on equity or the ROE, which is the ratio of profits to equity. We can rewrite the ROE to 
show its direct connection to the return on assets. This additional factor here is what we call the 
leverage ratio. Alongside each dollar invested by the owners, the bank also raises some debt to 
finance its assets. The leverage ratio captures how much borrowing is going on. Higher 
leverage means less equity is used to finance each dollar of assets. Higher leverage means 
more borrowing. If a bank is fully financed by equity, then it will have a leverage ratio of one. In 
this case, the ROE and the ROA are the same thing. Whenever a bank borrows, this will 
increase the return for the owners by a factor of capital L.  
 

Technology Strategy 
Professor Rustom Manouchehri Irani  
15 
 
Here is JPMorgan again. We can see the ROA of 0.91%. That doesn't sound like very much. 
Alongside the ROA, we have the return on common equity of 12%. Much bigger. Why is the 
ROE so much larger? The answer has to be leverage. Down here we can see total assets and 
common equity. Roughly speaking, this gives us a leverage ratio of 13. For every dollar that 
common stockholders kick in, the bank borrows 12 dollars to finance its investments. This levers 
up the ROA by a factor of 13 and gives us a ROE of 12%. This is one of JPMorgan's headline 
measures of performance.  
 
 
Let's take a quick look at the performance of US banks in the last 25 years. This is based on 

Technology Strategy 
Professor Rustom Manouchehri Irani  
16 
financial statement data collected by the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation. First, we have 
the average return on assets. For a typical bank, it was around 1.2% before the 2008 crash, and 
then lower, around one percent once the economy settled down between 2010 and 2020.  
 
 
Let's focus on just one cause of bank profits and see how it relates to ROA. The blue line shows 
the ratio of loan loss reserves to total loans. This is a measure of potential losses in the loan 
portfolio. When loan loss reserves spike up, this means loans aren't doing so well. Since bank 
assets mostly consist of loans, there is a clear negative association with ROA.  
 
 

Technology Strategy 
Professor Rustom Manouchehri Irani  
17 
Let's layer on the return on equity. What really stands out here? The numbers on the vertical 
axis. In good times, when the ROA is hovering around 1.2%, the ROE is as high as 15%. This 
tells us that leverage must be about 10-1. This high leverage amplifies the ROE in good times, 
but it makes the crashes much more dramatic. We can see this in 2008 and also in 2020.  
Let's wrap up. We covered three important measures of bank performance. Market-based 
measures are informative, but they are only available for publicly traded banks. Accounting 
measures. We examine the return on assets and the return on equity. Both can be calculated 
for any bank. These measures tell us how banks turn a profit. Did the bank make great 
investments and keep cost under control or did the bank take on lots of leverage? One final 
thought, we have been completely silent on risk. Making a 15 percent return on equity is all 
good and well, but what if those returns are fragile? As investors, how should we think about 
risks? As bank managers, what can we do about them? This is our next order of business. 
 
 

Technology Strategy 
Professor Rustom Manouchehri Irani  
18 
Lesson 3-2: Overview of Bank Risks and Risk Management 
Lesson 3-2.1: Overview of Risk 
 
What is risk? For a bank, where does risk come from? And then what should a bank do about 
it? How do banks manage risk? In this session, I'm going to provide a very brief overview of risk. 
In future sessions, we will unpack the various sources of bank risks, and discuss common 
approaches to risk management.  
 

Technology Strategy 
Professor Rustom Manouchehri Irani  
19 
 
How do we define risk? Well, when we make financial decisions, there is usually some 
uncertainty about an outcome that will arrive in the future. I make an investment today, and I'm 
not sure how much it will pay off tomorrow. Although we don't know what is going to happen, we 
can usually describe this uncertainty. We can make a list of potential outcomes. Some of these 
outcomes might be great; others might be undesirable. For example, a bank might be worried 
about making losses in its loan portfolio. We can also try to assign probabilities to these various 
potential outcomes. Some events might have a zero probability. This means they will never 
happen. Estimating the probability or frequency of an event is not an easy task, but this is 
central to risk measurement. Banks engage in a variety of activities.  
 

Technology Strategy 
Professor Rustom Manouchehri Irani  
20 
 
Some of these activities expose them to potential losses. These losses may arrive in the future. 
There is uncertainty surrounding these potential losses. Very small losses might be unlikely; 
other losses might have a higher probability. Measuring and managing these potential losses is 
central to a bank's performance.  
 
 
Let's introduce the main risks facing managers at modern banks. In future sessions, we will look 
at the measurement and management of these risks in much greater detail. Okay, here we go. 
Banks invest in assets such as loans and securities. Some of these assets might not repay in 
full. This is called credit risk. Banks raise short-term funding and invest in long dated assets. 
This maturity mismatch across the balance sheet creates something called interest rate risk. 

Technology Strategy 
Professor Rustom Manouchehri Irani  
21 
Depositors and other liability holders can sometimes quickly withdraw their cash from banks. 
Banks have to meet these withdrawals, but most of their funds are tied up in hard to sell long-
term investments. This presents banks with liquidity risk. Banks hire traders, these traders buy 
and sell securities and derivatives in financial markets. These instruments are recorded in the 
trading book. When market conditions change, these positions can gain or lose value. This is 
called market risk. Finally, we have operational risk. This covers a broad range of risks that can 
be hard to itemize. It includes the risk that technology or support systems could become 
inadequate. This could be the result of a cyber-attack. It could also come from fintech firms 
disrupting traditional business models and stealing bank customers and bank revenue. 
Employee fraud is a major component of operational risk.  
 
If one or more of these risks create large enough losses than our bank could fail. This is 
sometimes called insolvency risk. Insolvency occurs, once the bank's equity is wiped out and 
liability holders stand to incur losses. Here, if losses are so large that they exceed Xd, then the 
bank fails. In this case, there is a 0.1% chance of that happening. Managers and owners don't 
want that to happen. So what can they do?  
 

Technology Strategy 
Professor Rustom Manouchehri Irani  
22 
 
Well, they engage in a broad set of tasks called risk control or risk management. There are 
really two steps in this process. First, risk exposures need to be measured. Second, we might 
want to manage these risk exposures.  
 
 
Here is an illustration of how our banks’ profits might vary with interest rates. That's the R on the 
x-axis. If rates increase, then our bank becomes less profitable. Risk management is a process 
that breaks this relation. Here, the profits of our bank no longer vary with interest rates. How is 
this achieved?  
 

Technology Strategy 
Professor Rustom Manouchehri Irani  
23 
 
Well, broadly speaking, banks can do a few things. They should always try and measure and 
price the risks that they take on board. Loans to unreliable customers should be more 
expensive. And if the risk is too great, they might prefer not to grant the loan or they could 
originate and sell the loan. Either way, the balance sheet exposure would be directly reduced. 
Banks can also hedge risks, which involves shifting the risk to other financial institutions. Loan 
guarantees, interest rate derivatives. These are types of financial instruments that allow banks 
to meet their customer demands, say, by granting risky long-term loans, but also limit the risk 
that the bank will fail. Remember, the goal is to break the link between profits and sources of 
risk.  
 

Technology Strategy 
Professor Rustom Manouchehri Irani  
24 
 
Let's sum up, we have introduced the concept of risk in a very general sense. We then gave an 
overview of the specific risks at banks, credit, interest rate, liquidity, market, and operational 
risk. We then gave an overview of approaches to risk control. At a minimum, banks should 
measure and price risks. Beyond that, banks can limit risk exposures by altering the balance 
sheet directly or hedging. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Technology Strategy 
Professor Rustom Manouchehri Irani  
25 
Lesson 3-2.2: Credit Risk 
Banks borrow, lend, and earn the spread. The spread comes from the difference between the 
earnings on assets and the cost of funding. For this to work out, earnings have to actually arrive. 
Borrowers have to repay their loans. This is what credit risk is all about. In this session, we are 
going to more precisely define credit risk. We will then discuss how banks and other financial 
institutions measure credit risk. In a final step, we will look at the various tools that banks use to 
manage credit risk. On the asset side of the balance sheet, banks grant loans or purchase 
bonds. These assets typically have long maturities. This means that banks will expect to receive 
payments of interest and principle over the course of many months and many years.  
 

Technology Strategy 
Professor Rustom Manouchehri Irani  
26 
If all goes to plan, the bank will receive every single one of those payments. This is the most 
likely outcome. However, there is some downside risk. Some borrowers might miss one or more 
payments. We call this event, default. This is typically a low probability event. Default can force 
a borrower into bankruptcy which can be very costly, so borrowers want to avoid this outcome. 
Nevertheless, when default occurs, it is harmful for the bank. Earnings will fall as will the value 
of the bank's asset portfolio.  
 
 
The effects of credit risk can be seen in this chart. Here, we have the charge of rates for bank 
loans over the past 25 years or so. Loans that are not repaid must be removed or charged off 

Technology Strategy 
Professor Rustom Manouchehri Irani  
27 
the bank's balance sheet, credit cards, business loans, mortgages. People need to live in their 
homes, so we see that mortgages tend to have the lowest default rates. Credit cards are 
unsecured and easy to ignore. As a result, credit cards tend to have higher default rates on 
average. We see that there is a strong business cycle component to all of these products. 
During economic recessions, households and businesses all tend to do poorly at the same time. 
This is called systematic credit risk.  
 
 
Here are the credit risk exposures at JPMorgan Chase in 2019 and 2020. Let's focus on the 
biggest exposures. In the balance sheet, we have loans. Some borrowers may miss a payment 
and transition into the non-performing bucket. Non-performing loans haven't died yet, but they 
are in trouble. Down here, we can see about 0.5% of the loan portfolio was charged off in 2020. 
The bank also has off-balance sheet exposures. Loan commitments are contingent assets. 
These include credit cards. Borrowers might draw down on these commitments. As we saw, 
credit cards have high default risk, and so JPMorgan is required to disclose these exposures. 
What do banks do about credit risk? Well, they measure it and they manage it. The 
measurement part is often called credit risk analysis. Economists also like to call this borrowers 
screening. Credit risk measurement happens at the front end when a borrower is applying for a 
loan. Lender spend resources to generate and process information about potential borrowers.  
 

Technology Strategy 
Professor Rustom Manouchehri Irani  
28 
 
The input will be borrower data. A loan officer may collect a paper or an online application from 
a potential borrower. This may contain information about the borrower's income, wealth, age, 
and occupation. A credit bureau may provide data on borrower's outstanding debts and 
previous repayment behavior. In the 21st century, there are endless options when it comes to 
alternative data. You can access spending data, Internet browser histories, location data, even 
information about social networks. What if you are Facebook friends with people that often 
default? The ethics of these alternative data are currently being debated. Some or all of this 
data will be plugged into the lender's credit risk model. These models take a variety of forms. 
They can be qualitative and follow a series of questions about the borrowers' specific 
circumstances. Why is the customer borrowing? What does the borrower need? How will the 
borrower repay? Can the lender be protected in some way? We also have statistical models that 
sort borrowers into risk categories based on observable characteristics. These models can 
range from simple regression analyses to the application of cutting-edge machine learning 
methods. These models always use data from past borrowers to predict the performance of our 
current applicant. The specifics of these models is super interesting, but it's beyond the scope of 
our current discussion. Regardless of the model, the output will be a credit rating. This credit 
rating corresponds to a probability of default.  
 

Technology Strategy 
Professor Rustom Manouchehri Irani  
29 
Corporations have credit ratings. A business might have a credit rating just at the investment 
grade cutoff. That would be a triple B rating. This means that the business has a 0.2 % 
probability of default. Individuals, well, that's us. We have credit ratings too. In fact, not having a 
credit rating is usually a very bad signal.  
 
Here is the FICO rating system. Scores run from 300-850. Highest scores correspond to a lower 
probability of default for a household. These scores are estimated by a private business, the 
Fair Isaac Corporation, hence FICO. They take data on our credit cards, car loans, mortgages, 
student debts, and whether we pay our bills on time. The information is processed into our FICO 

Technology Strategy 
Professor Rustom Manouchehri Irani  
30 
score using their proprietary default prediction model. Let's assume that we can measure credit 
risk. We have a loan applicant and we have a credit rating. Then what should we do? The first 
thing to note is that defaults will happen. They are an inevitable part of the lending business.  
  
 
The goal of any lender is to be compensated and protected. We can see this with the design of 
loan contracts. Let's say our credit rating is above the bar and we want to make a loan. We can 
use our credit rating to price the loan. Riskier borrowers are more likely to default, so we should 
set a higher interest rate. The lenders should be compensated for potential credit losses. 
Lenders may also include performance-related clauses into long contracts. These are called 
covenants. Covenants restrict or encourage certain behaviors that reduce the probability of 
default. For example, a covenant could limit the amount of new debts that a business borrower 
can issue. When covenants are violated, borrowers are required to report to the lender. 
Hopefully, the problem can be resolved before things get worse. For example, the borrower and 
lender could renegotiate the loan. This is usually called a workout.  
 
 

Technology Strategy 
Professor Rustom Manouchehri Irani  
31 
 
Here is JPMorgan's customer assistance program in its consumer loan portfolio in 2020. Due to 
the COVID-19 pandemic, many customers were struggling with debt repayments. This included 
about $10 billion of mortgages. From a legal standpoint, JPMorgan could demand the 
immediate repayment of these loans. However, if the goal is to minimize losses, then offering 
some forgiveness in the short-term may be more prudent. In many cases, JPMorgan often 
offered to defer these missed payments until the end of the loan term. With mortgages, we can 
see that about 95% of borrowers subsequently got back on track. 
 
The final elements of contract design is the security or priority structure. When a loan is 

Technology Strategy 
Professor Rustom Manouchehri Irani  
32 
secured, it is backed by an asset that the lender can claim in the event of default. When a loan 
is senior, it has the first claim on the assets of the borrower. Having a senior and secured claim 
reduces losses in the event of default.  
 
 
 
This is evident when we look at the recovery rates by the type of debts. The recovery rate 
measures how many cents on the dollar is clawed back when a business files for bankruptcy. 
The state is from 1983 until 2017. It is collected by Moody's, which is one of the bigger credit 
rating agencies. Default is bad news. Everyone loses out. However, we can see that the senior 
secured claims recover more than the junior claims.  

Technology Strategy 
Professor Rustom Manouchehri Irani  
33 
Diversification is the most basic tool that banks can use for protection. Banks will invest in a 
variety of assets across products, locations, and industries.  
 
Diversification across assets will not eliminate credit risk, but it may limit the chances of very 
bad outcomes in the asset portfolio. For a given desired return, it is possible to choose a 
combination of investments that reduces risk to a minimum feasible level.  
 

Technology Strategy 
Professor Rustom Manouchehri Irani  
34 
 
To further reduce credit risks, banks have two more options. The first is loan sales. If credit risk 
is too high, then banks can simply choose to sell the loan. The loan is gone and so is the credit 
risk. This can happen at the time of origination or afterwards. This can be a whole loan sale or a 
partial sale through loan syndication. We have discussed syndication in the past. This is 
common for large corporate or commercial real estate loans that carry a lot of risk. When banks 
originate and distribute loans, they lose out on some or all of the interest income. They collect 
upfront fees instead. The final option is to use credit derivatives. These derivatives act a lot like 
insurance against borrower default. Credit default swaps or CDS, are the most common 
example. For a fee, a bank can buy a CDS on a loan. This derivative may pay out whenever the 
loan defaults. The bank gives up some profit from the loan, but no longer has to worry about 
default.  
 

Technology Strategy 
Professor Rustom Manouchehri Irani  
35 
Let's wrap up. This time, we introduced the concept of credit risk. This is the risk that loans will 
not get repaid on time and in full. Credit risk models take in borrower data and spits out a credit 
rating. The credit rating corresponds to a probability of default. Lenders can protect themselves 
against credit risk through carefully designed contracts, diversification, and if that's not quite 
enough, then they can offset risk by selling loans or using derivatives. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Technology Strategy 
Professor Rustom Manouchehri Irani  
36 
Lesson 3-2.3: Interest Rate Risk 
Banks borrow, lend, and earn the spread. They raise deposits and borrow in capital markets 
and they invest most of the proceeds in loans and bonds. We know this already. What might be 
less obvious, is that banks borrow short and lend long. Their investments tend to be longer 
maturity than their liabilities. Mortgages can mature in 20 years, whereas deposits have 
maturities of less than one year. Checking accounts are zero in maturity. In this session, we will 
discuss how this maturity mismatch between the assets and the liabilities creates interest rate 
risk. We will define this risk. We will introduce two channels that connect interest rates to the 
profitability and valuation of a bank. Then a final step, we will discuss how banks control interest 
rate risk.  
 

Technology Strategy 
Professor Rustom Manouchehri Irani  
37 
Interest rates are volatile. This is just a fact of life. Here is data showing the federal funds rates 
over a long time horizon. This interest rate is tied to the monetary policy of the U.S. Federal 
Reserve System. Right now we are not going to discuss where this interest rate comes from, 
but we can see it is volatile. There were wild swings in the 1980s. Since 2009, interest rates 
have been unusually low and stable. The belief is that these rates will eventually lift off but the 
precise timing is uncertain.  
 
Why should banks care? Well, uncertainty means risk and in this case, we have uncertainty 
about interest rates. Our goal is to understand how and why movements in interest rates might 

Technology Strategy 
Professor Rustom Manouchehri Irani  
38 
impact bank cash flows and bank valuations. We will see that maturity mismatch between 
assets and liabilities plays a central role.  
 
 
Let's start with the pathway from interest rate volatility to bank profits. This is called the cash 
flow channel. It focuses on a bank's interest income and interest expenses and it works as 
follows. Banks make investments in loans and bonds. The earnings on those investments 
depend on the interest rates. If interest rates are high, that's good news for the bank. It can earn 
higher income on its loans.  
 
 

Technology Strategy 
Professor Rustom Manouchehri Irani  
39 
Here is the interest rate on newly granted 30-year fixed rate mortgages in the United States. A 
mortgage that was granted in the year 2000 and held for 30 years will earn higher interest 
income than a mortgage granted in 2010 or 2020. Banks often fund those investments through 
borrowing. This suggests that higher interest rates might be bad news for a bank.  
 
Here is the three month interest rate on certificates of deposit also known as CDs. CDs are a 
short-term bond that some banks issue to fund their investments. When this rate increases, 
banks have higher interest expenses. So are banks better or worse off when interest rates rise? 
Well, it depends on the bank.  
 

Technology Strategy 
Professor Rustom Manouchehri Irani  
40 
Here is a bank that borrows short and lends long. This is a fairly typical bank. It has $100 of 
assets that mature in two years. Let's say these assets pay five percent interest per year. This is 
a fixed interest rate that pays out each year. This investment is funded with borrowing. The 
borrowing costs are four percent per year but the borrowing is short maturity. It needs to be 
refinanced at the end of the first year. The bank makes a net interest income. That's interest 
income of $5 minus interest expense of $4, so net interest income is $1 in the first year. What 
about the second year? Well, that depends on the borrowing rate a year from now. There is 
refinancing risk. If the one-year borrowing rate increases from 4% to 5%, then the bank makes 
no profits. Any higher than that and the bank loses money. From a cash flow standpoint, a 
bank's exposure to interest rate risk depends on when its assets and liabilities mature. Whether 
a financial instrument is fixed or variable rate matters as well, with a variable rate loan, a new 
interest rate can apply almost immediately. Long-term assets with fixed rates are insensitive to 
interest rate changes. They have rates that are locked in for a long time. Conversely, short term 
or variable interest rate loans will be more sensitive.  
 

Technology Strategy 
Professor Rustom Manouchehri Irani  
41 
Let's put that all together. Suppose that interest rates go up. Interest income will increase. 
Interest expense will also increase. What about profits? That's the difference between income 
and expenses. The overall impact is unclear and it depends on the bank.  
 
We can also connect interest rates to the valuation of our bank. To understand how this works, 
let's start with the pricing of a bond. This is a bond that pays a fixed coupon each year and then 
some lump sum at maturity. The market value of this bond is given by this formula. It takes 
those future cash flows and discounts them back to the present day using the interest rate. 
When interest rates rise, we discount by more and the value of the bond decreases. This means 

Technology Strategy 
Professor Rustom Manouchehri Irani  
42 
that longer dated bonds, those are assets with a larger N, will lose even more value. On the 
other hand, the price of short dated assets is less sensitive to changes in interest rates.  
 
 
We can throw out all of these higher power terms and we just have discounting by the gross 
interest rate. Here's the fun part. We can think about a bank as a portfolio of bonds on the asset 
side of the balance sheet.  
 
Conceptually, the bank's liabilities which are deposits and other borrowings also resemble 
bonds. We can value all of these assets using our bond pricing formula. We can value the 

Technology Strategy 
Professor Rustom Manouchehri Irani  
43 
liabilities the same way, and then we can also value the banks equity. Remember, the value that 
flows to the shareholders is the value of selling the assets at market value, paying down the 
debt and then pocketing the difference. Interest rates will have an impact on this calculation. 
When interest rates go up, what happens? Well, according to our bond pricing formula, the 
value of the asset portfolio will go down. The value of the liabilities will go down as well. The 
overall effect on the bank's equity is ambiguous. That's what I've noted here. However, banks 
typically have longer dated assets and shorter dated liabilities. So from a valuation standpoint, 
this means that assets are more interest rate-sensitive than liabilities. This means that higher 
interest rates are usually bad news for banks. If maturity mismatch is the root cause of interest 
rate risk, then bank managers can try to close this gap. For example, if a bank issues a five-year 
CD, then it could invest the proceeds in a five-year mortgage loan. This helps, but as a general 
approach, it presents a major problem. Banks make a profit by meeting the demands of their 
customers. Save is like convenience. Many deposit accounts can be emptied on-demand. They 
can be zero maturity. On the other hand borrowers prefer long-term loans.  
 
 
Maturity mismatch is fundamental to the lending business. To get around this problem, risk 
managers have several other tools at their disposal. This includes the use of derivatives. 
Interest rate derivatives can be used to transfer the risk of volatile interest rates to a third party. 
Interest rate swaps, which are by far the most popular product, allow a bank to exchange a 
variable interest payment stream for a fixed string. For a price, this would take interest rate risk 
off the table without disrupting our customers that want short-term deposits or long-term loans. 
Diversification into noninterest income has been the other popular approach. Since the late 
1990s, banks have emphasized fee income coming from outside of the commercial banking 
business. Investment banking, insurance, underwriting, brokerage services, and so on. Profits 
from these business lines may be less sensitive to interest rates.  
 

Technology Strategy 
Professor Rustom Manouchehri Irani  
44 
Let's wrap up. Interest rates are uncertain. Changes in interest rates can have a direct impact 
on interest income, interest expense, and therefore bank profits. The market value of a bank will 
respond to changes in interest rates as well. This happens through a discount rate channel. In 
both cases, maturity mismatch between assets and liabilities plays a central role. Finally, we 
provided a brief overview of how risk managers can mitigate interest rate risk. Closing maturity 
mismatches is the simplest approach, but other methods may be less disruptive. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Technology Strategy 
Professor Rustom Manouchehri Irani  
45 
Lesson 3-2.4: Liquidity Risk 
All financial institutions face the risk that their liability holders will want their cash back. This 
includes us closing our checking accounts down, or maybe we want to make a big purchase 
and decide to max out  our credit card. Events like this put pressure on banks to come up with 
funds. These are commitments that banks must honor. Sometimes these commitments must be 
honored at very short notice. Our goal in this session is to understand how banks manage cash 
shortfalls. We will introduce the concept of liquidity risk, we will then discuss what banks can do 
about it both in normal times and when they experience sudden and large surges in 
withdrawals. The surges are often called liquidity crises or bank runs.  
 

Technology Strategy 
Professor Rustom Manouchehri Irani  
46 
Risk is about uncertainty surrounding some future outcome. Liquidity risk is about cash 
shortfalls and how expensive they can be. At any point in time there is cash flowing into the 
bank. This can be new deposits, investment returns, fee income, and at any point in time cash 
can leave the bank. A cash shortfall occurs when there is more cash leaving the bank than 
flowing in. Sometimes these periods are cheap to handle, perhaps banks can easily come up 
with cash but sometimes these periods can be expensive. It really depends on the prevailing 
market conditions. Where could these cash shortfalls come from? We have already mentioned 
deposits or withdrawals. I have the right to convert my checking account into cash at very short 
notice. Banks also rely on wholesale funding. This is short-term debt that may need to be 
renewed or rolled over on a regular basis. If investors become risk averse, they may refuse to 
roll over the funding and instead demand their cash back. Credit commitments. This includes 
our credit cards give borrowers the right to loans. This is cash that the bank must provide.  
 

Technology Strategy 
Professor Rustom Manouchehri Irani  
47 
 
Here is our simplified bank balance sheet. On the asset side we have cash, securities, and 
loans. This adds up to $100 of investments. That $100 is funded by deposits, borrowing, and 
owner's equity. When credit cards are charged, cash goes out and loans are added to the 
balance sheet. When deposits are withdrawn, cash also goes out and debt is subtracted from 
the balance sheet.  
 
 
We can see these major sources of liquidity risk at JP Morgan Chase. This is the credit portfolio 
in 2020. Here are the undrawn loan commitments. They are about 50% of total loans 
outstanding. When these loans are drawn down, JP Morgan has to come up with the funds.  

Technology Strategy 
Professor Rustom Manouchehri Irani  
48 
 
Here is the funding side of the balance sheet. Borrowed funds are a meaningful source of 
finance for JP Morgan. This borrowing can be done on a short-term basis. This exposes the 
bank to rollover risk. These withdrawals are fairly predictable in normal times. This allows banks 
to manage liquidity risk without too much difficulty. Banks use two approaches to handle 
withdraws. The first is called asset management. Here banks use cash reserves to handle cash 
shortfalls. The second method is called liability management. In this case banks do some short-
term borrowing to plug the gap. Let's see how this works when our simplified bank has a deposit 
withdrawal.  
 

Technology Strategy 
Professor Rustom Manouchehri Irani  
49 
Suppose $10 is pulled out. Deposits declined from $70 to $60. The bank has lost $10 of 
funding. With asset management, the bank simply hands over its cash to meet the withdrawal. 
$10 of cash is gone. Bank assets shrink down to $90 as well. Of course, the bank could also 
achieve the same outcome by selling its liquid securities. This is another response coming from 
the asset side of the balance sheet.  
 
Instead of selling assets, the bank could raise additional funds. The bank could replace the $10 
of deposit withdraws with another $10 of debt. To meet the shortfall, the bank could borrow from 
another depositor or another financial institution. This is called liability management. In normal 

Technology Strategy 
Professor Rustom Manouchehri Irani  
50 
times these two methods usually work out well and they allow banks to manage their cash 
shortfalls. However, there are times when banks can face a liquidity crisis. This is when cash 
shortfalls are much larger than expected. Liability holders can withdraw their funds all at once. 
This is called a bank run. This most often happens when investors lose confidence in the bank.  
 
 
As a result the usual liquidity management tools can fail or become more expensive. For 
example, banks might be shut out of money markets. On the asset side once cash reserves are 
gone, banks might be forced to dump their loans and other less liquid assets at unfair prices. 
This is called a fire sale.  
 

Technology Strategy 
Professor Rustom Manouchehri Irani  
51 
 
Here is an example of a fire sale starting in late February 2020. These are the prices of 
business loans that trade in financial markets. We can see the rapid drop-off and rebound in the 
price of these loans. If a bank has to sell business loans at the bottom to meet a funding 
shortfall, that's going to be very costly.  
 
 
If a bank is not well-prepared for a liquidity crisis, then it could become insolvent, its equity could 
get wiped out. Let's see how this works when our simple bank experiences a run. Here is our 
bank. Let's assume that some depositors and debt holders run. $20 of deposits run away, and 
all of the borrowed funds are gone. Overall, $40 is gone. This is the cash shortfall. Our bank is 
in trouble so let's assume that it shut out from borrowing. Liability management is not going to 
work. Our bank has some cash and securities. We can hand that over right away. That's $25. 

Technology Strategy 
Professor Rustom Manouchehri Irani  
52 
The remaining $15 will have to come from selling loans. The bank has no other choice. Loans 
are not easy to trade because they're information sensitive. Potential buyers face adverse 
selection risk and demand a sizable discount.  
 
 
Our bank has to sell $20 of loans in order to raise the $15 that it needs. In the end, we have our 
$40 in cash. Over it goes and our run is over. What were the costs of scrambling for cash? Well, 
the bank sold $20 of loans at a loss of $5. That's a $5 loss that the owners have to bear. This 
leaves the bank with only $5 of equity.  
 

Technology Strategy 
Professor Rustom Manouchehri Irani  
53 
Here is our bank at the end of this process. It is a smaller bank and the shareholders have less 
equity but it survived. If our bank had carried more cash or use less wholesale funding, then it 
might be in better shape. Taking a step back, we can see that cash shortfalls have an impact on 
equity values. In the extreme they can wipe out shareholders and cause a bank to fail.  
 
 
Let's wrap up. In this session, we introduced the concept of liquidity risk. All banks have to deal 
with cash short flows, they can use methods that stem from the asset or the liability side of the 
balance sheet. Banks that carry lots of cash or have access to stable funding are more resilient. 
These banks are better positioned to handle liquidity crisis. 
 

Technology Strategy 
Professor Rustom Manouchehri Irani  
54 
Lesson 3-2.5: Market Risk 
Many banks employ traders. These traders buy and sell financial instruments. They invest some 
of the bank's equity and hope to make some profit for the owners, but this trading activity is 
risky. As we all know, market prices can go up and they can go down. In this session we are 
going to describe this trading risk. It is often called market risk because it relates to prevailing 
market conditions. We will introduce the concept and then discuss value at risk. This is a 
common method for evaluating risk-taking by traders.  
 
Market risk comes from the trading book. As we have seen before, we can divide a bank up into 

Technology Strategy 
Professor Rustom Manouchehri Irani  
55 
its lending business and trading business. The lending business consists of long-term 
investments held in the bank book. The trading book includes long and short positions in 
securities derivatives and other financial instruments. Items held in the trading book are marked 
to market on a daily basis. This means that banks have to immediately recognize losses when 
the value of its trading positions change.  
 
 
Market risk captures this uncertainty. If market conditions change, prices will change, and this 
may impact our banks’ profits and equity value. The subprime mortgage crisis of 2007 through 
2009 is a classic example of losses due to market risk. Beginning in 2006 house prices in the 
US began to fall. Subprime borrowers, these are the borrowers with the highest default risk. 
Well, they began to default. Many financial institutions actively traded subprime mortgages 
through their holdings of mortgage backed securities or MBS. These securities took heavy 
losses. To give you some context, subprime MBS losses were around one trillion dollars by mid-
2009. Total bank equity, this is summed across all U.S. banks, was around $1.3 trillion before 
the crisis. Many banks became insolvent due to market risk exposures. You may have heard of 
Lehman Brothers. Back then, Lehman was a famous investment bank. Lehman declared 
bankruptcy on September 15th 2008. It rocked the financial world. Market risk played a key role 
in Lehman's fall.  
 

Technology Strategy 
Professor Rustom Manouchehri Irani  
56 
 
Let's take a closer look. Here is Lehman's trading portfolio in May 2008. Here we can see 
Lehman's holdings of MBS, $72 billion altogether. Between July 2007 and July 2008 these MBS 
fell in value by around 50%. That's 50. We can be generous and assume these are AAA rated 
securities. Roughly speaking, that's 50% times 72, a $36 billion loss. What you can't see here is 
that Lehman had $26 billions of equity. This means that the mark to market losses in the NBS 
portfolio wiped out the banks equity. This is how Lehman failed.  
 
Trading can be highly profitable but banks understand that market risks can threaten solvency. 
Risk managers understand this, and they monitor traders portfolios. They analyze market risk 

Technology Strategy 
Professor Rustom Manouchehri Irani  
57 
and they put limits on the amount of risk that an individual trader can take home. The daily 
value-at-risk is a common measure of trading risk. It tells us how many dollars the trading 
portfolio will lose tomorrow under a worst-case scenario.  
 
Here is a simple example to illustrate value at risk. We have two bets. Both require $1,000 
investment. The first has a 50/50 chance of loss or profit. A $100 loss when market conditions 
are bad, and a $300 gain when market conditions are good. The expected return is $100. The 
other bet has four potential outcomes. Sum of the probability now shows up in the tails.10% of 
the time we lose $800; 10% of the time we gain $1,000. The expected return is the same. The 
value at risk answers the question where are my losses in the worst case scenario? For bet 1 
we can lose at most $100, and for bet 2 it's $800. If we are worried about the worst possible 
outcome, then bet 2 is riskier. Banks apply the same concept to a trading portfolio. In practice, 
this is very complicated.  
 

Technology Strategy 
Professor Rustom Manouchehri Irani  
58 
JPMorgan Chase has dozens of trading units spread across the globe, but if we can estimate 
how sensitive profits are to market conditions, then we can aggregate this up to the portfolio 
level, and under certain conditions this will give us a nice smooth distribution that tells us the 
likelihood of different profits. The value at risk answers the question, I am X percent confident 
that profits will exceed Y dollars tomorrow. Here we have a 99% value at risk. So 99 times out of 
100, the trading portfolio will have profits greater than Y dollars. Or we can say that in the one 
percent worst-case scenario, the bank's profits will be less than Y dollars. If this potential loss is 
too large, then the position will be sold. One final point, value at risk is often criticized as a 
measure of risk. Let me briefly explain why.  

Technology Strategy 
Professor Rustom Manouchehri Irani  
59 
In practice, return distributions are not always smooth. Under extreme market conditions, 
returns can be a lot worse than anticipated. These extreme events are sometimes called black 
swans. This corresponds to a fat tail in the return distribution. The value at risk statistic is still 
valid. Profits will still exceed Y dollars, 99% of the time. However, if tomorrow turns out to be a 
bad day, the average return can be a lot worse than Y. During 2008, for many financial 
institutions, trading returns fell into the fat tail region of the distribution. Risk managers and 
regulators realized that extreme losses could far exceed the value at risk projections. Since 
then, new market risk models have emerged that account for this possibility.  
 

Technology Strategy 
Professor Rustom Manouchehri Irani  
60 
 
We covered two points in this session, we introduced the market risk concept. This is about 
potential trading losses. This can arrive tomorrow and can be extremely bad. We then 
discussed how value at risk can put a dollar value on these tail events. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Technology Strategy 
Professor Rustom Manouchehri Irani  
61 
Lesson 3-2.6: Operational Risks  
This session will give a very brief description of operational risk. I will show you some concrete 
examples and discuss the magnitudes of the losses that can be attributed to operational risk. 
Here is a formal definition of operational risk. It is the risk of loss resulting from inadequate or 
failed internal processes, people, and systems or from external events. This is a fairly vague 
catch-all definition that covers many potential losses. Internal failures include fraud. External 
events can be anything from a cyberattack to an earthquake. I'm going to highlight the three 
sources of potential losses that get the most attention. Operational failures. This includes 
technology malfunctions and data breaches. Employee errors such as the accidental execution 
of a trade at the wrong price can also result in losses. Employees can also commit fraud. Over 
the years banks have sustained multi-billion dollar losses due to undisclosed or unauthorized 
trades. These have been surprisingly frequent among large banks.  
 

Technology Strategy 
Professor Rustom Manouchehri Irani  
62 
 
Here we have the fines paid by banks from 2008 until 2015. These fines are due to illegal 
activities, fraud related to mortgages, fraud related to the Libor rate fixing scandal, fraud related 
to the London Whale case. You might have heard of this last one. This is an example of 
undisclosed trading at JPMorgan. The trade lost the bank around $6 billion plus a $1 billion fine. 
That's what we mean by operational risk. It may be hard to predict but you know it when it 
happens. Just to put these numbers in context Bank of America is top of the pile. They had 
some $80 billions of fines during this time-frame. At the end of 2015, their equity capital was 
around $200 billion. So these losses were a sizable chunk of the bank's equity value.  
  
Finally, we have Fintech competition. Fintech firms have up-ended the traditional business 

Technology Strategy 
Professor Rustom Manouchehri Irani  
63 
model of many financial services firms. This could result in the loss of customers and the loss of 
earnings. To defend their position, banks will have to adopt new technologies and upgrade their 
legacy IT systems. Of course, this is risky and it might not work out.  
 
 
Here is an example of those investments in action. This is JPMorgan's digital strategy within its 
consumer banking business, online loan applications, online check deposits, mobile payments, 
digital wealth management apps. In 2020 JPMorgan had a tech budget of around $10 billion.  
 
 
Let's sum up. Operational risk really is a catch-all. These are not losses that come from making 

Technology Strategy 
Professor Rustom Manouchehri Irani  
64 
bad deals in the day-to-day lending or investment banking business. These are losses that can 
arrive due to screw ups, fraud, technology failures, or technology just becoming out of date.  
 
 
