Central Banks and Monetary Policy 
Professor Ralf Meisenzahl 
 
1 
 
Module 4: Financial Crises 
Table of Contents 
Module 4: Financial Crises ...................................................................................................... 1 
Lesson 4-0.1: Overview ......................................................................................................................................... 2 
Lesson 4-1: Understanding Financial Crises .....................................................................................5 
Lesson 4-1.1. Bank Runs and the Panic of 1907 .................................................................................................... 5 
Lesson 4-1: Understanding Financial Crises ................................................................................... 18 
Lesson 4-1.2. The Great Depression.................................................................................................................... 18 
Lesson 4-1: Understanding Financial Crises ................................................................................... 33 
Lesson 4-1.3. Common Features of Financial Crises ........................................................................................... 33 
Lesson 4-1: Understanding Financial Crises ................................................................................... 48 
Lesson 4-1.4. Auto Loans During the 2008 Financial Crisis ................................................................................. 48 
Lesson 4-2: Policy Responses to Financial Crises ............................................................................ 59 
Lesson 4-2.1. The Fed as Lender of Last Resort .................................................................................................. 59 
Lesson 4-2: Policy Responses to Financial Crises ............................................................................ 70 
Lesson 4-2.2. Fiscal Responses to Financial Crises .............................................................................................. 70 
 

Central Banks and Monetary Policy 
Professor Ralf Meisenzahl 
 
2 
Lesson 4-0 Module 4 Information 
Lesson 4-0.1: Overview  
Hello and welcome, I hope you're doing well from wherever it is you're joining us. In this 
module, we focus on the role of central banks as lenders of last resort. For this purpose, 
we study several financial crises and discuss why they came about. We then consider 
the policy responses by central banks to this crisis. We see that central banks can 
succeed but that there are limits to how far they can go alone.  
 

Central Banks and Monetary Policy 
Professor Ralf Meisenzahl 
 
3 
The first crisis we look at is the panic of 1907. This was the first Major financial crisis of 
the 20th century. It was also the last US. Banking panic that occurred before the 
Federal Reserve system was founded. This crisis helps us understand why a central 
bank as the lender of last resort is needed. We then study the Great Depression. The 
Great Depression is another useful example because much of the present-day social 
safety net did not exist. Next, we take an international perspective on financial crisis and 
identify common themes that help us identify the causes of financial crisis. This big 
picture perspective highlights credit booms that were financed with either short term or 
phone funding and combined with investments in long term projects or unsustainable 
government policies. Such credit booms foreshadowed financial crisis.  
 
We reiterate the risks on relying on short term funding by studying the US auto loan 
market During the 2000 and eight financial crises here. Non-bank lenders relied heavily 
on short term funding markets to originate order loans when the short-term funding 
markets dried up. Auto sets collapsed. After all these examples, you may wonder 
whether credit booms always lead to financial crises and recessions. The short answer 
is no. As the next lesson discusses, it depends on in which sector the credit boom takes 
place. For example, credit booms in the manufacturing sector are often sustainable, at 
least historically. Having examined causes and consequences of financial crisis, we 
then turn to the policy responses. Specifically, how can central banks counteract bank 
runs and chart drops in credit supply. For this purpose, we studied the responses of the 
federal reserve to the 2008 financial crisis and the COVID-19 pandemic that illustrate 
the concept of the land of last resort, that is the Federal Reserve Lands when no one 
else bought. Monetary policy is not the only way to respond to financial crisis. Fiscal 

Central Banks and Monetary Policy 
Professor Ralf Meisenzahl 
 
4 
policy, which involves government transfers and spending can also have the economy. 
In the final lesson, we therefore discussed the fiscal response to financial crisis.  
 
 

Central Banks and Monetary Policy 
Professor Ralf Meisenzahl 
 
5 
Lesson 4-1: Understanding Financial Crises 
Lesson 4-1.1. Bank Runs and the Panic of 1907  
  
Hello and welcome to this class on bank runs and the Panic of 1907. We will proceed in 
two steps. First, we will understand what a bank run is and why banks are prone to 
runs. We will then consider our first major case study, the Panic of 1907. This is one of 
the most prominent financial crises in US history. It was a massive banking panic. It led 
to the formation of the modern Federal Reserve system. We will understand why the 
panic happened and how it was resolved. Understanding these historical episodes can 
be enjoyable and highly informative. Please don't worry about the precise historical 
details. I will mention many details, but these are mostly for fun, focus on the narrative 
and what we can learn.  
 

Central Banks and Monetary Policy 
Professor Ralf Meisenzahl 
 
6 
 
Let's get started, why are banks susceptible to runs? Well, banks borrow short term by 
taking deposits and lend long term this creates a maturity mismatch between assets, 
the loans, and the liabilities, the deposits. This maturity transformation is a key feature 
of the bank's business model. So why might a run occur? Remember that depositors 
can withdraw their funds at any time. If some shock or bad news arise this presents a 
risk to depositors. They might decide, play it safe and withdraw perhaps because they 
see people waiting in line in front of a bank. It is usually rational to join a bank run. If the 
saver joins the queue, then there is a chance that they get their money back. First in line 
will usually get paid. If they do not join the run, then they might lose out. Last in line 
might get nothing.  
 

Central Banks and Monetary Policy 
Professor Ralf Meisenzahl 
 
7 
 
What are the consequences of bank runs? When many depositors arrive at the same 
time, the bank may not have enough cash on hand. Most deposits are tied up in long 
term investments. This is how maturity transformation works. In this case, the bank 
would be illiquid. It has run out of cash. A bank being illiquid is different from a bank 
being insolvent. An illiquid bank lacks cash, but its investments could still be profitable. 
An illiquid bank still has a viable business; it can still be solvent. On the other hand, an 
insolvent bank has run out of equity it is bankrupt. The worst-case scenario occurs 
when solvent banks fail due to runs. This can happen when banks are forced to sell 
assets with large discounts to meet depositor withdrawals. In our case studies, we will 
see how this dynamic plays out in practice. We will then see why various financial 
regulations and government institutions exist to prevent this worst-case scenario.  
 

Central Banks and Monetary Policy 
Professor Ralf Meisenzahl 
 
8 
 
Let's now examine our case study the Panic of 1907. The Panic of 1907 is a helpful 
episode to learn about bank runs. At the time two features of the modern financial 
system were missing. First, there was no central bank. This means banks had no 
access to government-backed emergency loans. And second, there was no deposit 
insurance. Without deposit insurance, depositors were much more panicky. They could 
lose their life savings if their bank failed. This historical episode helps us to understand 
what might happen without the modern government interventions designed to prevent 
bank runs. Let's have a look how this financial crisis unfolded.  
 

Central Banks and Monetary Policy 
Professor Ralf Meisenzahl 
 
9 
 
Like most crises, there was not a single cause, but a buildup of bad news that led to 
bank runs. The story starts with the San Francisco earthquake of 1906, which caused 
damages of about 1.5% of GDP. Such a large shock immediately rippled through the 
financial system. Insurers had to sell assets to meet insurance claims. Depositors 
withdrew money from banks, and stock markets in New York and London dropped. This 
trend continued. Over a series of days in March 1907 stocks declined by over 10%. 
Money markets were stressed, with interest rates shooting up from 2.5% to over 10% 
on several days. This event has been referred to as “the silent crash” because it did not 
happen in a single day, but over several days. The second shock was the 1907 crop 
harvest, it was not as rich as the previous year, reducing exports. The US treasury, 
unable to refinance maturing bonds, withdrew $30 million from banks. With the 
government and depositors withdrawing more money from banks, the money supply 
contracted, credit became scarce, and interest rates further increased. In short, financial 
conditions worsened substantially during the summer of 1907. Against this backdrop, 
there was one more crucial factor. Speculators making risky bets in the stock market 
financed with short term bank loans. When these risky bets blew up, the bank loans 
defaulted, and this started the banking panic. This is the short version of the story. 
Here's the longer version which you may find fascinating.  
 

Central Banks and Monetary Policy 
Professor Ralf Meisenzahl 
 
10
 
The Heinze process were very wealthy copper miners. In 1907, they moved to New 
York City and joined forces with Charles W. Morse to speculate in the copper equity 
market.  
 
 
They bought many shares of the United Copper Company. They used these stocks as 
collateral for their transaction with as many as 20 banking houses. The Heinze process 

Central Banks and Monetary Policy 
Professor Ralf Meisenzahl 
 
11
and their colleagues were speculators making risky bets on the stock market financed 
with short term bank loans.  
 
 
On October 9th,1907, Otto Heinze decided to analyze the trading behavior in the United 
Copper stock. He discovered that about 450,000 shares of this stock were traded. Even 
so, according to the company, only 425,000 shares were outstanding. That meant that 
some brokers had lent their stocks to investors who shorted the stock. This means 
these other investors borrowed the stock and sold it in the hope to buy it back at a 
cheaper price later and thereby make a profit. The Heinze suppressor believed that the 
brokers had lent out the shares that they owned and had pledged as collateral. They 
reasoned that by calling in the shares they could create a situation in which the short 
sellers would be forced to buy the shares they owned at a very high price. This is called 
a short squeeze.  
 

Central Banks and Monetary Policy 
Professor Ralf Meisenzahl 
 
12
 
To induce the short squeeze, the Heinze process had to borrow $1.5 million to pay off 
the loans collateralized with the stocks. When the United Copper stock dropped again 
from $45.50 to $37.75, the process started calling in the shares by requesting to pay off 
their loans. Within hours, the stock rose by $23, but then declined to about $52. 
However, the process had miscalculated. All 20 banks that had extended the process 
loans backed by the stocks delivered all the stocks. As a result, the process was not 
able to meet all the required loan payments and refused to accept the delivery of the 
stock. The lenders immediately sold off the rejected collateral and the stock price 
tumbled. After three days, the United Copper stock had lost 50% of its value and 
eventually traded at $10 per share. The short squeeze scheme had failed miserably. 
The Heinze brothers were bankrupt. On October 16th, their brokerage firm closed. So 
did a small bank owned by one of the Heinze brothers. That small bank, however, used 
the New York based Mercantile Bank for payment services and had deposits worth 
about $1 million. The Mercantile Bank also had direct exposure to the United Copper 
stock, that had collapsed in value. These events were so alarming that people began 
pulling their money from any bank associated with the Heinze process. The panic 
began. 
 

Central Banks and Monetary Policy 
Professor Ralf Meisenzahl 
 
13
 
To coordinate an orderly settlement of all claims, the New York Clearing House, a 
consortium of New York banks, stepped in on October 20th. This was a private sector 
intervention designed to calm the banking panic.  
 
 
However, during the clearinghouse meetings, the Knickerbocker Trust, which was the 
third largest bank in New York, was implicated in financial irregularities due to their 
association with the Heinze brothers. This signaled that the Knickerbocker Trust was in 

Central Banks and Monetary Policy 
Professor Ralf Meisenzahl 
 
14
serious trouble. It is not clear that the Knickerbocker Trust was financially unsound, but 
banks rely on trust. If depositors question whether they will get their money back, they 
simply will withdraw.  
 
 
And so, on the morning of October 22nd, 1907, a line started forming in front of the 
Knickerbocker Trust office an hour before they opened. The line seems to grow by the 
minute, with all depositors demanding their money back. The police were called to help 
with the line formation. By midday, Knickerbocker announced that it had assets worth 
about 69 million and liabilities of only 64 million and could pay out everyone. No one 
dropped out of line. Knickerbocker lost 8 million of deposits that day. This is an example 
of a classic bank run. Knickerbocker was financially sound, but worried depositors 
demanded their money back anyway.  
 

Central Banks and Monetary Policy 
Professor Ralf Meisenzahl 
 
15
 
The next day, Knickerbocker ceased operations. However, many other healthy banks in 
New York were swept up in the panic. By October 24th, 1907, several banks had failed. 
When runs on the Trust Company of America started, New York's most famous banker, 
J.P. Morgan, and others stepped in. They provided cash loans to meet depositor 
demands. The lack of cash pushed the New York Stock Exchange to the brink of 
collapse. Once again, J.P. Morgan intervened, raising the capital needed to keep the 
stock exchange in business.  
 

Central Banks and Monetary Policy 
Professor Ralf Meisenzahl 
 
16
 
With more banks on the brink of collapse, J.P. Morgan summoned about 120 New York 
bank presidents to his home in New York in early November. He demanded that they 
help solve the crisis. To force a solution, he famously locked the banker into his library. 
Eventually, the bankers agreed, and J.P. Morgan contributed another $25 million to 
resolve the crisis. This good news stopped the banking panic, but plenty of the damage 
was already done. It was too late to prevent bank failures and too late to stop a severe 
recession.  
 

Central Banks and Monetary Policy 
Professor Ralf Meisenzahl 
 
17
 
Let's wrap up, The Panic of 1907 is viewed as one of the most severe financial crises in 
US history. What can we learn from this episode? First, depositors panicked because 
they were worried about losing their savings. A lack of trust and cash can lead to 
depositors’ panic. This explains why deposit insurance prevents bank runs; insured 
depositors will be protected from any potential losses. This is probably why classical 
bank runs with depositors lining up around the block are rare nowadays. The second 
lesson is that cash loans can help stop bank runs that are in progress by meeting 
depositor demands. In the panic of 1907, J.P. Morgan acted as a lender of last resort. In 
1907, we were fortunate that J.P. Morgan did not run out of cash or face any trouble at 
his own bank. Without government backing, the option of private lenders of last resorts 
are limited. This explains why the Federal Reserve, with its unlimited resources, can be 
more effective as a lender of last resort.  
  
 
 

Central Banks and Monetary Policy 
Professor Ralf Meisenzahl 
 
18
Lesson 4-1: Understanding Financial Crises 
Lesson 4-1.2. The Great Depression 
  
Hello and welcome to this class on the Great Depression. In the modern era, the Great 
Depression was the most severe financial crisis and economic downturn in the United 
States and most of the western world. We will examine how financial conditions evolved 
during the Great Depression. We will see the massive number of bank failures. We will 
understand why the Federal Reserve system was ineffective at stopping the banking 
panic. Last, we will examine the large-scale government response that kick started the 
economy and restored confidence in the banking sector. This included government 
spending programs. It also included the creation of new institutions such as deposit 
insurance. Understanding these historical episodes can be enjoyable and highly 
informative. Please do not worry about the precise historical details. I will mention many 
details, but these are mostly for fun. Focus on the narrative and what we can learn. The 
Great Depression is interesting because most policies that would mitigate the effects of 
a financial crisis, such as deposit insurance or unemployment benefits, did not exist in 
the US. This helps us to understand what would happen in an economy if the 
government did not intervene during a financial crisis.  
 

Central Banks and Monetary Policy 
Professor Ralf Meisenzahl 
 
19
 
Let's start by briefly summarizing the start of the Great Depression. On October 24, 
1929, the so-called Black Thursday, the market lost 11% on the opening bell. The crash 
followed a drop of the London Stock Exchange caused by fraud allegations against 
large investors. On October 28, 1929, more and more investors faced margin calls on 
stocks bought on credit due to dropping stock prices. As a result, more investors sold 
their shares and cut their losses. The Dow lost almost 13% that day. The next day, 
investors traded a record number of shares. 16 million shares changed hands on a 
single day. The next day, the stock market showed signs of illiquidity. Some stocks 
could not be sold at any price. The Dow lost another 12%.  
 

Central Banks and Monetary Policy 
Professor Ralf Meisenzahl 
 
20
 
The chart shows the Dow-Jones industrial stock price index. As you can see, the 
developments over October 1929 were just the prelude to long decline in stock prices. 
From September 1929 to July 1932, stock prices chopped by over 80%.  
 
 
When the crisis began, over 8,000 commercial banks belonged to the Federal Reserve 
system, but nearly 16,000 did not. At the time, banks often owned stocks themselves 
and had limited cash reserves, so not having access to the Federal Reserve system for 

Central Banks and Monetary Policy 
Professor Ralf Meisenzahl 
 
21
cash was problematic. Banks without access to the Federal Reserve often deposited 
cash with other larger banks, creating the potential for contagion in case small banks 
withdrew their deposits from large banks. Or large banks themselves ran into difficulties, 
in this environment, depositors naturally wondered about the soundness of banks. A 
perhaps surprising feature of the Great Depression is that there was not one national 
bank panic, but a large number of local banks runs. In total, about 9,000 banks closed 
their doors between 1929 and 1933.  
 
 
The large number of bank closures sharply reduced deposits. Banks in turn tried to 
shore up their cash reserves and reduced lending. And as a result, the money supply 
shrank. You may wonder why the Federal Reserve did not just increase the money 
supply. At this time, the United States, as most other nations, was on the gold standard, 
meaning that money was packed to gold at a fixed exchange rate that severely limited 
the central bank's options.  
 

Central Banks and Monetary Policy 
Professor Ralf Meisenzahl 
 
22
 
Lower money supply put downwards pressure on prices. In this chart we can see that 
consumer prices deflated by about 25% during the Great Depression. The decline was 
even more pronounced for food. This deflation meant that farmers and firms faced 
higher debt in real terms, meaning in terms of goods produced. As a result, many 
farmers and businesses went into bankruptcy. This bankruptcy would cause additional 
stress in the banking system. Lower prices and especially expected lower prices in the 
future reduce the incentives to invest. If holding cash means that you can buy more 
tomorrow in terms of goods, why invest the cash in a risky business endeavor that can 
only charge low prices in the future?  
 

Central Banks and Monetary Policy 
Professor Ralf Meisenzahl 
 
23
 
With deflation setting in and less credit being available, business investment 
plummeted. The reduction in investment, together with the large number of 
bankruptcies, led to a prolonged decline in industrial production. As you can see in this 
chart, industrial output dropped by 50% during the Great Depression. This was an 
unprecedented drop-in economic activity.  
 
 
With the economy contracting, unemployment rose fast. In this chart you see the 

Central Banks and Monetary Policy 
Professor Ralf Meisenzahl 
 
24
unemployment rate increased from virtually zero at the beginning of the depression to 
over 25% by the end of the depression. Poverty and social unrest followed as 
unemployment insurance did not exist.  
 
 
One of the most prominent examples of social unrest was the World War I Veterans 
March. In 1932, the [inaudible] World War I veterans organized a group called the 
Bonus Expeditionary Forces to march on Washington DC.  
 

Central Banks and Monetary Policy 
Professor Ralf Meisenzahl 
 
25
 
An estimated 20,000 veterans converged on the nation's capital and camped in 
Washington DC, demanding a bonus payment that had been promised but had stalled 
in conquest. The protest was eventually broken up by force, but the pictures of tanks 
dispersing hungry veterans weakened President Hoover's reelection bid.  
 
 
In November, Franklin Delano Roosevelt's campaign on economic populism won the 
election, and the veteran bonus was eventually paid in 1936.  

Central Banks and Monetary Policy 
Professor Ralf Meisenzahl 
 
26
 
 
One of the first actions of Roosevelt after being sworn in was to declare a bank holiday, 
or more precisely, a bank holiday week on March 6, 1933. For an entire week, nobody 
had access to banks or banking services. That meant that no money could be 
withdrawn or transferred, and arrested bank runs that had started again earlier that 
year. The purpose of the bank holiday was to buy time to enact legislation that would 
restore confidence in the banking system and thereby prevent future runs. The 
Emergency Banking Act of 1933 achieved this goal. In short, the act would ensure that 
only banks in good condition would reopen and banks in poor conditions would be shut 
down. Moreover, the act gave the Federal Reserve more authority and made it easier to 
lend to banks. The Federal Reserve effectively became the guarantor of deposits of 
reopened banks.  
 

Central Banks and Monetary Policy 
Professor Ralf Meisenzahl 
 
27
 
The results were immediately visible. After the act passed, the Dow-Jones Industrial 
Stock Price index gained over 15% in one day, and bank runs ceased.  
 
 
The Banking act of 1933, also called the Glass-Steagall Act, added protections for 
depositors in June 1933. By separating commercial meaning, deposit taking, and 
investment banking, depositors were no longer exposed to banks risk taking in stock or 
more generally, securities markets. The act also established the Federal Deposit 

Central Banks and Monetary Policy 
Professor Ralf Meisenzahl 
 
28
Insurance Corporation, or FDIC, providing some insurance for deposits, which helped to 
prevent further runs. The Banking act also increased bank supervision and altered 
some features of the Federal Reserve system. While the banking panic was over, the 
real economy was still in dire straits.  
 
 
As part of the “New Deal” that fundamentally reshaped the role of government in 
economic crisis, Roosevelt's first objective was to alleviate the suffering of unemployed 
workers. The government created jobs through the Works Progress Administration and 
the Civilian Conservation Corps. The Works Progress Administration gave some 8.5 
million people jobs, mostly in construction. More than 650,000 miles of roads, 125,000 
public buildings, 75,000 bridges, and 8,000 parks were built. The Civilian Conservation 
Corps provided work that included planting trees, building flood barriers, fighting forest 
fires, and maintaining forest roads. It is important to note that these projects could be 
started on short notice and had immediate effects.  
 

Central Banks and Monetary Policy 
Professor Ralf Meisenzahl 
 
29
 
The chart shows you that unemployment dropped by 9 percentage points within a year.  
 
 
The economic plight of people had also shown the need for a social safety net. The 
creation of a pension system through the Social Security Administration. Unemployment 
benefits and disability benefits were part of the “New Deal”. The “New Deal” also 
restructured labor relations, by creating the National Labor Relations Board. The 
economy seemed to be on track again. However, the “New Deal” needed to be 

Central Banks and Monetary Policy 
Professor Ralf Meisenzahl 
 
30
financed, and taxes increased. Moreover, with the improvements in the economy, the 
fiscal stimulus was withdrawn. At the same time, the Federal Reserve increased reserve 
requirements for banks, thereby reducing the availability of credit.  
 
 
In other words, contractionary monetary and fiscal policy hit the economy at the same 
time in 1937.  
 

Central Banks and Monetary Policy 
Professor Ralf Meisenzahl 
 
31
You can see the result in the chart. Industrial production collapsed again in 1937. The 
recession ended when the Federal Reserve reduced reserve requirements. The 1937 
episode provides a cautionary tale against withdrawing economic support too early.  
 
 
The recovery was swift as you can see in this chart, unemployment chopped fast after 
the 1937 recession. However, it is important to note that another stimulus helped the 
economy to grow so fast. The defense buildup in Europe and the subsequent increase 

Central Banks and Monetary Policy 
Professor Ralf Meisenzahl 
 
32
in government spending. You can see that starting mid 1940, the reduction in 
unemployment accelerated.  
 
What have we learned in this lesson? First, using the Great Depression as a case study 
of the consequences of financial crisis. We saw that the effects can be devastating, 
especially in the absence of a social safety net or government interventions. Second, 
only large-scale changes to the financial system can restore the confidence in the 
financial system. Third, the recession of 1977 illustrates that providing too little or 
withdrawing government support for the economy too early may result in another 
economic slowdown.  
 
 

Central Banks and Monetary Policy 
Professor Ralf Meisenzahl 
 
33
Lesson 4-1: Understanding Financial Crises 
Lesson 4-1.3. Common Features of Financial Crises  
Hello, and welcome to this class on common features of financial crises. We will provide 
a broad overview of the major global financial crises over the past 150 years. Our goal 
is to understand how the crises unfolded, why the crisis was global, and are there any 
similarities across these crises? We will uncover these common themes of financial 
crisis. You will see that excessive debt always plays a role. There's always a run on 
short-term debt such as bank deposits. Unsustainable long-term investments or 
government policies often play a role as well. Does a rapid expansion of credit always 
end in a financial crisis? Towards the end of the class, we will address this question as 
well. Let's get started.  
 

Central Banks and Monetary Policy 
Professor Ralf Meisenzahl 
 
34
 
The five most serious global financial crisis over the last 150 years were the Panic of 
1873, the Barings Crisis of 1890, the Panic of 1907, the Great Depression of the 1930s, 
and the 2008 Financial Crisis. Let's consider each of them in turn. This will be a brief 
description and remember, our goal is to find the features that come up time and time 
again. Please try to focus on the big picture and not on all the small details.  
 
The Panic of 1873 was the first global banking crisis. Railroads were the hot investment 

Central Banks and Monetary Policy 
Professor Ralf Meisenzahl 
 
35
of the mid 1800s. Milestones like the completion of the Transcontinental railroad 
connecting the US east and west coast in 1869, fueled the interest in railway 
investment.  
 
 
This was not only true in the US, but also in Europe. For instance, railway companies 
financed by debt popped up all over Germany. Railroad stock prices jumped worldwide. 
Many banks held railway bonds as an investment. A key vulnerability of a country's 
banking system became railroad bond speculation. Indeed, railroads needed a lot of 
upfront investment and produced little or no return in the early years, presenting the risk 
to investors.  
 

Central Banks and Monetary Policy 
Professor Ralf Meisenzahl 
 
36
 
There were a number of contributing factors that eventually led to the burst of the 
railroad speculation bubble. For instance, the Boston and Chicago fires right before the 
crisis reduced bank reserves. Germany and the US abandoned silver currencies, which 
put strains on miners and reduced the need for railroad networks. And dislocations from 
the Franco-German war were still present. The first signs of the crisis became visible in 
Vienna, where the stock exchange crashed on May 9th, 1873, and a series of 
bankruptcies followed. In Germany, a large railway company collapsed, adding to the 
panic. In the US, J Koch and Company, a major bank, was unable to sell railway bonds. 
It collapsed mid-September, sparking bank runs and failures across the US.  
 

Central Banks and Monetary Policy 
Professor Ralf Meisenzahl 
 
37
 
A prominent victim of the US banking crises was the Friedman Savings Bank. This was 
the first and only bank at the time that served the free former slaves.  
 
 
The US and the Europe plunged into a deep recession with unemployment rising fast. 
This crisis also affected the Ottoman Empire and Latin America. All told, this crisis 
originated in speculative investments, real world bonds that led to large losses, and a 
lack of trust in the banking system.  

Central Banks and Monetary Policy 
Professor Ralf Meisenzahl 
 
38
 
 
A different type of investment, namely government debt, sparked the so-called Barings 
Crisis of 1890. By 1890, Argentina had experienced a decade of large capital inflows.  
 
 
The capital was raised mostly in London by European banks, including Barings bank.  
 

Central Banks and Monetary Policy 
Professor Ralf Meisenzahl 
 
39
 
The money was used to finance long-term investment projects in infrastructure, 
including the building of railroads and transportation networks, and the improvement of 
farmlands. However, by the late 1880s, as much as 40% of foreign borrowing was going 
to debt service and 60% of imports was going towards consumption goods. The 
Argentinian government was also running a substantial budget deficit. Railway net 
profits had peaked in 1888 and eventually international investors became wary of 
Argentina's government's debt burden. Eventually, Barings could not find investors for 
Argentina's debt issuance. Argentina experienced bank runs and unable to raise new 
funds, defaulted on its government bonds. This default led to a sharp recession in Latin 
America, but also to sharp stock market drops in Europe and the US. As with the 1873 
Crisis, a credit boom to speculative long-term investments eventually turned bad. But 
note the international linkages. The speculative activity was fueled by international 
investors.  
 

Central Banks and Monetary Policy 
Professor Ralf Meisenzahl 
 
40
 
The next crisis, the Panic of 1907, originated in copper speculation. Since we discussed 
the Panic of 1907 in a separate lecture, I will be brief. The San Francisco earthquake 
caused large losses for insurance companies, railways, and banks. Against this 
backdrop, speculation in copper equities gone wrong led to even more losses in the 
banking system. This led to a banking panic, bank closures, and a recession that 
spread from the US to Europe. In the US, the unemployment rate rose to over 16%. 
Global markets were also hit hard. For instance, the British unemployment rate doubled 
from 3.6% to 7.8% between 1906 and 1908. Germany, Japan, and Italy also 
experienced bank runs. The Panic of 1907 is an example of financial market speculation 
gone wrong. However, the effects are like another crisis. Bank losses caused bank 
runs. Then the disruption in the banking system caused credit and the real economy to 
contract. Here too, there were international linkages. This included overseas exposures 
to insurance companies, underwriting disaster risk in San Francisco, and risky stock 
market bets by foreign investors. This allowed the crisis to spread from the US to the 
rest of the world.  
 

Central Banks and Monetary Policy 
Professor Ralf Meisenzahl 
 
41
 
The Great Depression provides the clearest example of the importance of international 
linkages. Since we discussed the Great Depression separately, let me just focus on the 
international component. In 1929, when the stock market crash in the US triggered the 
Great Depression, most countries were on the gold standard. The gold standard meant 
that all paper currency was convertible into gold and gold reserve therefore dictated the 
money supply.  
 

Central Banks and Monetary Policy 
Professor Ralf Meisenzahl 
 
42
This also meant that most countries operated at a fixed exchange rate system as each 
currency was fixed to gold.  
 
 
At that time, the US was a net lender of gold in the global markets. However, when the 
banking crisis unfolded, the US hoarded gold rather than lending it out. This left other 
countries scrambling to maintain their gold reserves to avoid a decrease in their 
respective money supply. A lower money supply puts strain on banks and led to 

Central Banks and Monetary Policy 
Professor Ralf Meisenzahl 
 
43
deflation around the world. For instance, the German Reichsbank basically went out of 
gold when short term creditors stopped lending to Germany. In the end, the gold 
standard was abandoned to allow countries to control their own money supply and 
avoid bank runs and deflation. In a nutshell, the Great Depression was transmitted 
through the global financial system because of fixed exchange rates. So different from 
earlier financial crisis, the issue here was not a common exposure to a bad long-term 
investment. This time, all currencies and all money supplies around the world were 
linked. With floating exchange rates, the value of the currency adjusts when facing an 
international shock. With fixed exchange rate, the money supply must adjust with large 
negative consequences.  
 
 
That brings us all the way to the 2008 Financial Crisis. You might now see how similar 
this event was to past crises. The crisis originated in the US housing market. Also, 
many other countries. Such as Spain and Ireland had also experienced a housing boom 
and bust. Many long-term mortgage investments funding the housing boom were 
financed by short-term credit. Once this short-term credit dried up, the mortgage market 
and house prices collapsed. As in previous financial crisis, international investors had 
gained exposure to these investments. The extent to this exposure became clear when 
a mid-sized German bank, the ECA Bay Deutsche Industriebank, failed in June 2007 
due to losses from US subprime mortgages. In addition, it became apparent that 
domestic players, most notoriously the investment bank Lehman Brothers, depended on 
short-term funding secured by mortgages.  
 

Central Banks and Monetary Policy 
Professor Ralf Meisenzahl 
 
44
 
Lehman Brothers collapsed in fall of 2008. So did the largest insurance company, the 
American International Group. This triggered a stock market crash and panic in the 
funding markets worldwide.  
 
 
In 2008, the Crisis unfolded worldwide because of the globally integrated financial 
system in which capital flows freely across borders. A globally integrated financial 

Central Banks and Monetary Policy 
Professor Ralf Meisenzahl 
 
45
system helps when shocks are small as they can be absorbed easily. However, a shock 
to the largest economy impacts everyone.  
 
 
Before we wrap up, let's consider one final question. Do credit booms always lead to 
financial crises? The short answer is no. Recent research shows that many credit 
booms do not result in financial crises, but instead can have sustained economic 
growth. This chart shows output dynamics before and after the peak of a credit boom for 
a sample of 189 countries from 1910 to 2014. The peak of the credit boom is indicated 
by event time equal to zero, the vertical line. There are two lines indicating two different 
types of credit boom. Roughly speaking, one is in construction and real estate, the other 
is in the manufacturing sector. What does this graph show? Well, on average, GDP 
grows strongly during the boom. However, after the peak, output only seems to decline 
after a real estate credit boom.  
 

Central Banks and Monetary Policy 
Professor Ralf Meisenzahl 
 
46
 
Why does this happen? Typically, a real estate credit boom increases house prices, 
construction of new homes, employment, and so on. However, eventually there will not 
be enough local buyers to sustain the boom. This will then put downwards pressure on 
house prices, which can lead to a collapse in the construction sector. In contrast, credit 
booms in the manufacturing sector can be more sustainable. This usually happens 
when they are driven by global demand or demand for new products. Think about the 
fast increase in manufacturing in South Korea from the 1960s to the 1980s. Most of 
these products were exported. Credit to the manufacturing sector can fund profitable 
investments. These higher profits help to pay off the debt incurred during the credit 
boom.  
 

Central Banks and Monetary Policy 
Professor Ralf Meisenzahl 
 
47
 
Let's wrap up. In this session, we have described the common features of financial 
crisis. They include excessive debt, especially short-term debt, long-term investments 
that eventually go bad, or some unsustainable government policy such as excessive 
spending or fixed exchange rates. We also saw how some financial crisis became 
global in nature. Last, we saw that that not all credit booms lead to banking crises or 
drops in GDP. Historically, credit booms in the manufacturing sector have been more 
sustainable.  
 
 

Central Banks and Monetary Policy 
Professor Ralf Meisenzahl 
 
48
Lesson 4-1: Understanding Financial Crises 
Lesson 4-1.4. Auto Loans During the 2008 Financial Crisis  
 
Hello and welcome to this lecture on auto loans during the 2008 financial crisis. In this 
case study, we will look at what happened in the auto loan market. A market in which 
non-bank lenders play a large role when short term funding dried up. We will see that 
not only banks are susceptible to runs, and that a drop in credit supply led to a drop in 
auto sales.  
 

Central Banks and Monetary Policy 
Professor Ralf Meisenzahl 
 
49
 
Before the 2008 financial crisis, about half of all auto loans were originated by captive 
finance companies. A captive finance company is a lender that is owned by the 
automaker, for instance, Ford Motor Credit, GM Financial, or Toyota Financial Services.  
 
 
The map shows you the distribution of market share of captive finance companies 
across US counties. As you can see, the market share is particularly high in Michigan 
where most of the automakers are located. In the South, which historically had less 

Central Banks and Monetary Policy 
Professor Ralf Meisenzahl 
 
50
banks than the North and in the West. In other words, captive finance companies were 
particularly strong where there was less access to bank credit.  
 
 
Different from banks, captive finance companies do not take deposits. Instead, captive 
finance companies funded themselves by issuing asset-backed commercial paper and 
asset-backed securities.  
 

Central Banks and Monetary Policy 
Professor Ralf Meisenzahl 
 
51
 
Let's first discuss how asset backed commercial paper worked in this context. A captive 
finance company would establish a trust and transfer auto loans into that trust. The trust 
would then issue commercial paper that is backed by the auto loans and the cash flow 
from these loans. The trust uses the proceeds of the asset backed commercial paper 
issuance to pay the captive finance company for the loans. Typically, these trusts are 
revolving. This means that the captive finance company puts in new order loans as old 
auto loans are being paid off. By doing so, the captive finance company has 
continuously access to short term funding which in turn allows the captive company to 
issue new loans. However, commercial paper has a maturity of at most 270 days and 
needs to be rolled over continuously. This means that the captive finance companies, 
just like banks, borrow short term and lend long term. That is, they engage in maturity 
transformation.  
 

Central Banks and Monetary Policy 
Professor Ralf Meisenzahl 
 
52
 
Asset-backed securities are slightly different. Here the captive finance company sets up 
a trust and transfers the auto loans into that trust. The trust raises money by issuing 
longer term notes.  
 
 
Here's an example from Ford Motor Credit Owner Trust 2018-B that issues almost one 
billion in notes. The notes will be backed by a pool of car, light truck, and utility vehicle 
loans bought by Ford Motor Credit. As you can see in this transaction, the maximum 

Central Banks and Monetary Policy 
Professor Ralf Meisenzahl 
 
53
maturity is seven years, a much longer financing horizon. There is not much maturity 
transformation in this deal. At the same time, you can also see that the longer maturity, 
the higher the interest rate on the note. Moreover, this is a one-time deal, meaning that 
different from asset-backed commercial paper, the pool of loans will not be replenished, 
and the loan payments are used to pay off the notes. Before the 2008 financial crisis, 
asset-backed commercial paper was the main source of funding for captive finance 
companies because it was cheaper than asset-backed securities and revolving.  
 
 
However, when the subprime crisis started to hit the mortgage market in 2006 and 
2007, investors became suspicious of the qualities of loan pools backing asset-backed 
commercial paper. One question that was asked was how many subprime auto laws 
were in those loan pools. When investors discovered that the pool from the General 
Motors Acceptance Corporation was of low quality, the concern spilled over into the 
auto loan market. Investors were less and less willing to roll over asset-backed 
commercial paper backed by auto loans, reducing funding available to captive finance 
companies. The response of General Motors Acceptance Corporation was dramatic. In 
October 2008, General Motors Acceptance Corporation announced that it would 
considerably tighten credit standards and would only lend to consumers with a credit 
score above 700. At the same time, the median credit score was 720. Meaning a large 
number of potential auto buyers would be denied credit. Other captive finance 
companies had also already tightened their credit standards. Nevertheless, investors 
refused to roll over asset back commercial paper, and this funding dried up completely. 
The collapse of the trust meant that the captive finance companies had to pay off the 
asset back commercial paper. General Motors Acceptance Corporation and Chrysler 

Central Banks and Monetary Policy 
Professor Ralf Meisenzahl 
 
54
Financial Incorporated were unable to meet their obligations and collapsed. The 
unwillingness of investors to roll over the asset-backed commercial paper is in essence 
the same as a bank run. Short term funding is withdrawn by all investors simultaneously 
leading to the collapse and liquidation of the trust. Let's look what this run on the asset 
backed commercial paper trust and the resulting credit crunch meant for auto loans.  
 
 
This graph shows you the year over year growth rate of auto loans. As you can see, 
they turned negative in early 2006 when the subprime crisis in the mortgage market 
started to unfold. But when investors stopped rolling over asset backed commercial 
paper in mid 2008, loan originations dropped by over 30 percent when compared to the 
previous year.  
 

Central Banks and Monetary Policy 
Professor Ralf Meisenzahl 
 
55
 
What happened to auto sales? As you can see in this graph, before funding for finance 
corporations dried up, US households bought about 16 million new cars at an annual 
rate. When the financial crisis hit, retail auto sales collapsed to 7.9 million at an annual 
rate in the first quarter of 2009. The timing suggests that the drop in auto sales was 
driven by a drop in credit supply. But how can we be sure that the drop in auto sales 
was not driven by low demand? During the financial crisis, many workers lost their job, 
and bleak economic prospects could have made consumers hesitant to buy new cars. If 
the collapse was driven by demand and not by reduced credit supply, we should see 
that other lenders were not stepping in and making loans when captive finance 
companies could not. 
 

Central Banks and Monetary Policy 
Professor Ralf Meisenzahl 
 
56
 
However, this graph shows you that in 2008, more auto buyers paid either with cash or 
got credit from a bank or a credit union. This suggests that runs on asset backed 
commercial paper had significant consequences for auto sales. The example of captive 
finance companies illustrates that runs can occur outside the banking sector. Indeed, 
every financial institution that engages in maturity transformation can be subject to a 
run.  
 

Central Banks and Monetary Policy 
Professor Ralf Meisenzahl 
 
57
However, before the 2008 financial crisis, regulators had largely ignored maturity 
transformation and credit provision by nonbank financial institutions. These nonbank 
financial institutions had no access to the Federal Reserve as the lender of last resort, 
that would help to stop the runs in the short-term funding markets. These runs, through 
their effects on credit supply, contributed to the depth of the recession that followed.  
 
What have we learned in this lesson? First, with captive finance companies as an 

Central Banks and Monetary Policy 
Professor Ralf Meisenzahl 
 
58
example, we showed that non-bank financial institutions engage in maturity 
transformation. Second, non-bank financial institutions experienced runs in the funding 
markets during the 2008 financial crisis. Third, the runs reduced auto credit and 
therefore auto sales.   
 
 

Central Banks and Monetary Policy 
Professor Ralf Meisenzahl 
 
59
Lesson 4-2: Policy Responses to Financial Crises 
Lesson 4-2.1. The Fed as Lender of Last Resort  
  
Hello and welcome to this class on the lender of last resort function of central banks. 
The Panic of 1907, the Great Depression, the global financial crisis of 2008. Banking 
panics and financial crises can have devastating impacts on the financial sector and 
ultimately the real economy. In this session, we will examine how a central bank, by 
providing short term cash loans during a financial crisis, can help to stabilize financial 
markets and prevent the worst-case scenario. We will see how these interventions 
should be designed in principle, but also how they work in practice. We will also 
understand the potential costs of these interventions. We will examine these issues in 
the context of the 2008 financial crisis and the 2020 global pandemic.  
 

Central Banks and Monetary Policy 
Professor Ralf Meisenzahl 
 
60
 
Let's get started. The idea that a government backed central bank should intervene and 
stop a financial crisis date to Walter Bagehot, a journalist from the 19th century 
England.  
 
 
In 1873, Bagehot famously said that in times of financial crisis, central banks should 
lend freely to solvent depository institutions, yet only against sound collateral and at 
interest rates high enough to dissuade those borrowers that are not genuinely in need. 

Central Banks and Monetary Policy 
Professor Ralf Meisenzahl 
 
61
This statement has become a touchstone for how central banks should respond to 
financial crises. Let's quickly unpack what it means. Let's start with “central banks 
should lend freely to solvent depository institutions”. Sometimes healthy banks are 
swept up in a banking panic. Since all banks borrow short and lend long, some of these 
healthy banks might run out of cash. This is who the central bank should support, the 
solvent banks.  
 
 
What about the second part? Against sound collateral and at interest rates high enough 
to dissuade those borrowers that are not genuinely in need. What does this achieve? 
First, the central bank should not lose money when it intervenes. These programs 
should not create losses for taxpayers. Second, borrowers should only tap the central 
bank when no other options are available. This should be a temporary support and not a 
long-term solution. The borrowers should want to pay back any central bank loans as 
soon as they can. Bagehot thought the government should intervene but do so with 
care. The ultimate goal is to stop the banking panic without losses to the taxpayer. 
That's the theory. Let's see how this works in practice. Let's consider central bank 
interventions in the two recent crises, the financial crisis of 2008, and the global 
pandemic of 2020.  
 

Central Banks and Monetary Policy 
Professor Ralf Meisenzahl 
 
62
 
Let's begin with the 2008 episode. This was triggered by the contraction of the US 
housing market that began in 2006. The decline in house prices was accompanied by a 
rise in mortgage delinquencies. As losses mounted, there was a sharp reduction in 
credit supply, especially in short term funding markets. This cumulated with the collapse 
of Lehman Brothers, a well-known investment bank, which sent shockwaves through 
global financial markets. By the fall of 2008, the US was on the brink of a deep 
recession.  
 

Central Banks and Monetary Policy 
Professor Ralf Meisenzahl 
 
63
 
How did the Federal Reserve respond? Well, the first thing they did was to cut interest 
rates from 5 to 1.25% in mid 2007, to effectively 0%. In addition, the Federal Reserve 
set up a variety of emergency liquidity programs to stabilize financial institutions and 
credit markets. The Fed wanted to stop the panic after Lehman Brothers failed. This 
was the Fed acting as the lender of last resort.  
 
Traditionally, the Federal Reserve would have provided emergency cash loans to only 

Central Banks and Monetary Policy 
Professor Ralf Meisenzahl 
 
64
banks through the discount window. However, in 2008, this was not going to work. 
Banks were no longer the only game in town. Non-banks played a crucial role in many 
funding markets. And many of these non-banks were swept up in the panic. For 
example, Lehman Brothers was an investment bank. It did not have access to the 
discount window. To stabilize funding markets, the Federal Reserve acted decisively by 
extending the reach of the discount window along three dimensions. First, longer term 
funding tried up for banks. The Federal Reserve established the Term Auction Facility 
or TAF. Second, securitization markets had collapsed after the bankruptcy of Lehman 
Brothers. The Federal Reserve established the Term Asset-backed-securities Loan 
Facility, or TALF to unfreeze this market. Participants in the TALF could get long term 
loans directly from the Fed to buy securitized loans. Third, many non-banks that were 
central to funding markets desperately needed cash. The most important and reputable 
investment banks are also called primary dealers. Primary dealers serve as the trading 
counterparties for the federal reserves, open market operations. They are crucial for 
monetary policy. They are also vital for well-functioning treasury markets.  
 
 
The Primary Dealer Credit Facility, or PDCF, and Term Securities Lending Facility, or 
TSLF, were established to meet their needs. Money market funds were experience 
runs, so the Fed established the Asset-Backed Commercial Paper Money Market 
Mutual Fund Liquidity Facility, or AMLF. Finally, the Commercial Paper Funding Facility, 
or CPFF, provided support for US issuers of commercial paper. This is the only example 
of a direct purchase program in 2008. This meant that the Federal Reserve bought 
commercial paper out right. While this was mostly issued by financial institutions, the 

Central Banks and Monetary Policy 
Professor Ralf Meisenzahl 
 
65
Fed did end up buying paper issued by non-financials, such as Harley Davidson or 
McDonald's. By historical standards, this was a highly unusual move.  
 
 
That was a large and complex intervention. Was it successful? Would vulture budget be 
happy? Well, first and foremost, the Federal Reserve did stop the financial panic and in 
each of these programs the emergency loans were backed by high quality collateral and 
above market interest rates were charged. The loans were repaid quickly, and the 
programs were wound down without any losses. On the other hand, this was a massive 
and unprecedented expansion of the government safety net. Many of the financial 
institutions receiving support were not depository institutions. They were not supervised 
or regulated by the Federal Reserve or another bank regulator. What if market 
participants continue to expect the Federal Reserve to offer support when things go 
back? How will this affect risk taking? There is no clear answer to this question. 
 

Central Banks and Monetary Policy 
Professor Ralf Meisenzahl 
 
66
 
Let's fast forward to 2020. The global pandemic arrived in the US in the first quarter of 
2020. By March 2020, there was severe volatility in the treasury market which was likely 
to cause disruptions in short term funding markets. This set off alarm bells around the 
world. Since the 2008 financial crisis showed how bad it can get, policymakers rushed 
to provide first support to the treasury market and then more broadly. As before, this 
included the Federal Reserve acting as the lender of last resort.  
 

Central Banks and Monetary Policy 
Professor Ralf Meisenzahl 
 
67
While the shock was very different, we will see the Central Bank's response was similar. 
Several liquidity facilities used during the 2008 financial crisis were rolled out again, 
including the Term-Asset-Backed Securities Loan Facility, TALF, the Commercial Paper 
Funding Facility, CPFF, and the Money Market Mutual Fund Liquidity Facility, MMLF. 
The perhaps largest program was the Paycheck Protection Program Liquidity Facility, or 
PPPLF. The Paycheck Protection Program was a government program providing 600 
billion in forgivable loans to small businesses. Under the PPPLF, lenders could receive 
funding for these loans from the Central Bank. The direct purchase programs played a 
much bigger role this time around. The Primary and Secondary Market Corporate Credit 
Facilities, the PSMCCF provided direct support to large businesses through the 
corporate bond market. The Fed was directly purchasing corporate bonds on a large 
scale. By April 2020, the Federal Reserve was also involved in direct lending to small 
businesses. The main street lending program allowed the Fed to partner with banks to 
originate small business loans.  
 

Central Banks and Monetary Policy 
Professor Ralf Meisenzahl 
 
68
 
Where does this leave us? What more can we learn about the lender of last resort from 
the 2020 episode? Well, let's start with the good news. First, these interventions look 
successful in avoiding a total meltdown of the economy. Second, we learn that crisis 
interventions seem to work best when fiscal and monetary policy work hand in hand. 
Perhaps the most successful government intervention was the Paycheck Protection 
Program. We can easily see why the Federal Reserve providing the 600 billion funding 
for these loans was crucial during a time of crisis. At this point, banks probably would 
have rather hoarded cash than make additional loans. How would Walter Bechet feel 
about all of this? Well, he only thought central banks should support depository 
institutions. That seems to be a thing of the past. He was also concerned about 
potential losses to taxpayers. Well, unfortunately, going from 2008 to 2020 we saw a far 
greater involvement of the Federal Reserve in direct lending to small and large 
businesses. This of course means that the Federal Reserve is directly exposed to 
losses if defaults in the corporate sector were to occur. That would surely make 
[inaudible] feel uneasy.  
 

Central Banks and Monetary Policy 
Professor Ralf Meisenzahl 
 
69
 
Let's wrap up. What have we learned in this session? The lender of last resort can stop 
financial crisis through emergency lending programs. Historically, these funds flowed to 
banks and loans required high quality collateral and above market interest rates. We 
saw how the Federal Reserve intervened to calm markets in 2008 and 2020. Finally, we 
discussed how the footprint of these emergency lending programs has expanded in 
recent years to cover non-banks as well as direct lending programs.   
 
 

Central Banks and Monetary Policy 
Professor Ralf Meisenzahl 
 
70
Lesson 4-2: Policy Responses to Financial Crises 
Lesson 4-2.2. Fiscal Responses to Financial Crises  
  
Hello and welcome to this class on the fiscal responses to financial crisis. In this 
session, we will discuss how fiscal policy can be used to reduce the harmful effects of a 
financial crisis and the recession that typically follows. Monetary policy alone cannot 
stimulate an economy that is facing a recession. Instead, we usually see the 
government deploy various interventions to aid the recovery. We will study three types 
of fiscal responses. First, government transfers to consumers. These include tax cuts or 
stimulus checks. Second, government support for businesses; and third, we will discuss 
direct spending by the government on items such as infrastructure projects. We will 
describe these approaches in turn and discuss their effectiveness. As before, we will 
consider the 2008 financial crisis and the 2020 global pandemic as case studies.  
 

Central Banks and Monetary Policy 
Professor Ralf Meisenzahl 
 
71
 
Let's get started, in any economy, total output, or GDP, always consists of the following 
private consumption, C, business investment, I, and government spending, G, and net 
exports, which is exports sold overseas minus imports or NX. For the United States in 
2019, consumption was about 68% of GDP. Business investment was 17%, 
government spending was 19%, and net exports was -4% which means the US 
imported more than it exported. So, consumption was by far the largest component of 
GDP at that time.  
 

Central Banks and Monetary Policy 
Professor Ralf Meisenzahl 
 
72
Now, let's have a look at what happened to private consumption in bad times. We can 
see that during normal times, consumption grows steadily, but then it collapses during 
bad times, during the 2008 financial crisis and its aftermath and then there was a much 
sharper drop during the 2020 global pandemic. In both cases, unemployment soared.  
 
This reduced income available to households for consumption because consumption 

Central Banks and Monetary Policy 
Professor Ralf Meisenzahl 
 
73
accounts for two thirds of GDP. This had a massive impact on the economy. Naturally, 
fiscal responses to financial crises focus on propping up consumption.  
 
How does the government do this in practice? First, note that the newly unemployed 
reduce consumption the most, so cutting income taxes won't help as the newly 
unemployed do not have any income anymore. The other approach is to send out 
stimulus checks to all households. This has been done twice in the US in 2008, an 
individual taxpayer could receive a payment of up to $600 and a couple up to $1,200. In 
2020, an individual taxpayer could receive up to $1,200 and a couple up to $2,400. 
 

Central Banks and Monetary Policy 
Professor Ralf Meisenzahl 
 
74
 
Are these stimulus checks effective? Well, yes and no. Recent research on the 2020 
stimulus checks suggests that only 42% was spent on consumption, 27% was saved, 
and 31% was used to pay off debt, why wasn't all of this spent? People with lower 
incomes did spend more of their stimulus checks, however, people with high incomes 
saved it. Also, given the US economy was shut down, there were limited opportunities 
to spend the money.  
 

Central Banks and Monetary Policy 
Professor Ralf Meisenzahl 
 
75
A second type of direct payment is more targeted. Increased unemployment benefits. 
Unemployment benefits were extended in 2009 and then increased and extended 
during the Covid-19 pandemic. This is a much more targeted interventions. Payments 
only go to people who recently lost their jobs. These households usually cut 
consumption most. Another approach is to pay businesses, not to lay off their 
employees. The government can cover part of the employer's wage bill. This approach 
was first tried out in Germany during the 2008 financial crises. The major advantage of 
this program is that we keep the match between the employer and the worker intact. 
This means the employee's skills do not depreciate. It also means that businesses do 
not need to rehire when demand increases again. In the United States during the Covid-
19 pandemic, the Paycheck Protection Program had a similar intent.  
 

Central Banks and Monetary Policy 
Professor Ralf Meisenzahl 
 
76
 
The program offered loans to small businesses that would be forgiven if they did not fire 
their employees. In other words, the program was designed to ensure that employees 
were paid even if sales dried up due to the lockdowns. It also means that these 
employees retained their incomes and did not have to cut consumption. Putting these 
pieces together, direct transfers to households can support consumption and GDP 
during a recession. Programs targeted to the newly unemployed and programs keeping 
people employed are the most effective.  
 

Central Banks and Monetary Policy 
Professor Ralf Meisenzahl 
 
77
 
Moving on. The second component of GDP is investment. In this graph, we can see 
how much investment contributes to GDP. Investment collapsed during the 2008 
financial crisis and fell once again in 2020.  
 
 
To counteract such drops, the government has limited options. The government can 
enact tax breaks or provide subsidies to foster investment. However, in the end, 

Central Banks and Monetary Policy 
Professor Ralf Meisenzahl 
 
78
investment is going to be driven by the state of the economy. For example, business 
investment will be driven by the demand for goods.  
 
 
This brings us to the last type of fiscal response. The government can increase its own 
spending for instance, the American Recovery and Reinvestment act of 2009 allocated 
$275,000,000,000 in federal contracts, grants, and loans to create jobs.  
 

Central Banks and Monetary Policy 
Professor Ralf Meisenzahl 
 
79
And then in 2021, in the wake of the global pandemic, the Infrastructure Investment and 
Jobs Act was passed.  
 
 
Both government spending bills included many public construction projects across the 
country. But is increasing government spending an effective tool to fight recessions? 
 

Central Banks and Monetary Policy 
Professor Ralf Meisenzahl 
 
80
 
The British economist John Maynard Keynes certainly thought so.  
 
 
Keynes argued that in a recession, when consumption falls, governments should make 
up for this lost demand by purchasing goods themselves. Keynes argued that this would 
stabilize GDP. The crucial question here is whether a dollar spent by the government 
increases GDP by more than $1.  
 

Central Banks and Monetary Policy 
Professor Ralf Meisenzahl 
 
81
 
This is called the government spending multiplier. In the Keynesian view, the 
government spending multiplier is larger than one, at least in recessions. This is 
because the government makes up for lost demand, which creates jobs and eventually 
increases consumption.  
 
 
Opponents of the Keynesian view argue that the government spending multiplier is less 
than one. They argue that the government cannot simply substitute for private 

Central Banks and Monetary Policy 
Professor Ralf Meisenzahl 
 
82
consumption. They suggest that the government replaces private demand with demand 
for different types of goods. Think about when the government increases military 
spending in response to a shock originating in the housing sector. Workers from the 
construction sector would need to find employment in the defense sector. This is clearly 
problematic as construction workers may not have the skills needed in the defense 
industry. Retooling workers in reallocating them across sectors can be costly and 
inefficient. Hence, the argument goes that the government spending multiplier is less 
than one. While most studies indicate that during recessions the government spending 
multiplier is larger than one, the evidence is mixed. As you might expect, the answer 
usually depends on how the money is spent.  
 
 
In a recession, the government should spend immediately but often projects take time.  
 

Central Banks and Monetary Policy 
Professor Ralf Meisenzahl 
 
83
 
Think about large infrastructure projects. They need careful planning, buy in from the 
stakeholders, and to go through the government purchasing process. All of this means 
that the implementation of programs is likely to be delayed.  
 
 
It is often hard to measure the effects of this spending. How do you measure the benefit 
of a repaired bridge? In sum, under some conditions, increasing government spending 
can be an effective way to support the economy in a recession. One final thought before 

Central Banks and Monetary Policy 
Professor Ralf Meisenzahl 
 
84
we wrap up. Monetary policy can play an important role in supporting these fiscal 
responses. How? Well, no matter which of these three types of government intervention 
is implemented, they all cost money. Remember that the central bank controls the 
interest rate. By lowering the interest rate, they can support a government stimulus 
program in two ways.  
 
 
First, it directly lowers the borrowing costs of the government. Second, it becomes 
cheaper for businesses to invest and for households to take out loans for consumption. 
This can amplify the effect of the government stimulus. The central bank can also 
support a stimulus program by providing funding for financial institutions. A leading 
example is the Paycheck Protection Program Liquidity Facility in 2020. Under this 
program, lenders receiving funding from the central bank to support grants made to 
small businesses under the government's Paycheck Protection Program. Without this 
central bank's support, lenders facing their own constraints might have been reluctant to 
help with this government program.  
 

Central Banks and Monetary Policy 
Professor Ralf Meisenzahl 
 
85
 
Let's wrap up, this was a session on the fiscal response to financial crisis. The central 
issue is how the government can support the economy to avoid the worst-case 
scenario. We covered three ideas. First, the government can prop up demand by either 
transferring money to households or increase government and spending. Second, 
targeted interventions, such as subsidizing wage bills or increasing unemployment 
benefits, are the most effective. Third, supportive monetary policy can help to facilitate 
government stimulus programs.  
 
