Banking and Financial Institutions 
Professor Rustom Irani 
1 
Module 2: Modern Banking 
Table of Contents 
Module 2: Modern Banking ................................................................................................... 1 
Lesson 2-1: A Brief History of Banking in the United States ...............................................2 
Lesson 2-0: Overview ....................................................................................................................................... 2 
Lesson 2-1.1: Early Banking in the United States ........................................................................................ 3 
Lesson 2-1.2: Bank Holding Companies ..................................................................................................... 14 
Lesson 2-1.3: Deregulation and Modern Banking ...................................................................................... 20 
Lesson 2-2: Organization and Functions of Modern Banks ............................................... 25 
Lesson 2-2.1: Bank Types and Borrowing ................................................................................................... 25 
Lesson 2-2.2: Bank Lending .......................................................................................................................... 33 
Lesson 2-2.3: Changes in the Lending Process ......................................................................................... 39 
Lesson 2-2.4: How Are Investment Banks Organized? ............................................................................. 44 
Lesson 2-2.5: Investment Banking Activities ............................................................................................... 51 
Lesson 2-3: Financial Statement Analysis of Modern Banks ............................................. 57 
Lesson 2-3.1 Balance Sheet.......................................................................................................................... 57 
Lesson 2-3.2: Off Balance Sheet .................................................................................................................. 71 
Lesson 2-3.3: Income Statement .................................................................................................................. 82 
 
 
 

Banking and Financial Institutions 
Professor Rustom Irani 
2 
Lesson 2-1: A Brief History of Banking in the United States 
Lesson 2-0: Overview 
 
Hello everyone, and welcome to module two of financial institutions. This module is 
called modern banking. In this module, we're going to zoom in on the business model of 
modern banks. We will begin with a brief history of money and banking in the United 
States. If we are going to fully appreciate modern banking, then it is a good idea to 
understand how we got here. Next, we will describe the organization and functions of 
modern banks. We will break our modern banks out into their commercial banking and 
investment banking businesses and examine these business models separately. In a 
final step, we will go from describing the banking business to analyzing financial 
statements. We will take a careful look at the balance sheet and income statements of 
modern banks to understand what's really going on at these financial institutions. By the 
end of this module, you should understand where modern banks came from, what they 
do and how they turn a profit. 
 
 

Banking and Financial Institutions 
Professor Rustom Irani 
3 
Lesson 2-1.1: Early Banking in the United States 
 
What we call the banking system has changed dramatically in the past 100 years. Our 
parents would probably visit their neighborhood bank and speak to a teller. In case 
you're wondering, a teller is an actual human being that works at a bank. Nowadays, we 
barely use ATMs anymore. Most of our banking has either done online or over our 
smartphones. As the technological and competitive landscape of banking has changed, 
so too has the structure of the banking industry. By structure, I mean, two things. First, 
the business model of banks. This includes the types of products they sell. And second, 
the numbers, sizes and physical locations of banks. In this session, we will focus on the 
historical trends in the US banking industry. We will see how changes in technology and 
regulation have given rise to what we call a bank in the 21st century.  
 

Banking and Financial Institutions 
Professor Rustom Irani 
4 
 
Our traditional bank does several things, but we can boil its business model down to 
taking dollars from depositors and giving them bank accounts and then channeling 
those funds to borrowers mostly in the form of loans. These bank accounts are basically 
money. We safely store our wealth without any price risk and we have access to the 
payment system. For example, we can write checks or use debit cards. Banks also add 
value by ensuring only credit worthy borrowers get loans.  
 
 

Banking and Financial Institutions 
Professor Rustom Irani 
5 
Traditional banks borrow land and earn the spread between interest income on loans, 
and interest paid on deposits. They are rewarded for their effort and risk taking.  
 
 
Modern banking is complicated. Here is JPMorgan Chase's organization charts. It 
shows the business segments in which JPMorgan operates. This includes the consumer 
banking business for people like you and me, but also the wholesale banking business 
which involves a lot more products. Organizations like JPMorgan have tens of 
thousands of subsidiaries that offer all types of financial services. How did we get from 
the traditional model of banking to a financial supermarket like JPMorgan Chase?  
 

Banking and Financial Institutions 
Professor Rustom Irani 
6 
 
In this session, we will discuss three organizational forms. The unit bank, the branch 
network and the bank holding company. Two themes will run through our discussion. 
First, where banks are legally permitted to operate. And second, the types of financial 
products and services that these banks are allowed to sell. In the 21st century, it seems 
like banks are able to operate wherever they want and offer every imaginable financial 
service. However, it is important to recognize that this was not always the case. 
Throughout history, giving banks permission to expand or change what they do has 
been a source of vigorous policy debate.  
 

Banking and Financial Institutions 
Professor Rustom Irani 
7 
Let's start with how banks spread themselves out geographically. By this, I mean, the 
number and locations of the brick and mortar office spaces of a bank. In the past, there 
were many restrictions on the number of branches that banks were allowed to have. 
States differed in their approaches. Some states were very strict. Illinois only permitted 
unit banking. This meant that a bank could only have one physical location.  
 
 
Here is the Continental Illinois bank. It was located At 2 8 South Lasalle Street in the 
Financial District of Chicago. All of the employees including the CEO were in one place. 

Banking and Financial Institutions 
Professor Rustom Irani 
8 
All of the loans were recorded at this building. Customers knew where to go. Unit 
banking was the law of the land in Illinois from 1870 until as late as 1985. I was shocked 
the first time I heard that.  
 
California was at the opposite end of the spectrum. They have always allowed banks to 
have branch networks within the boundaries of the state.  
 
 

Banking and Financial Institutions 
Professor Rustom Irani 
9 
Here is the Branch Network of Bank of America, circa 1929 used to be headquartered in 
San Francisco with branches throughout the state.  
 
 
There are several reasons why Illinois and other states enacted strict branching rules. 
Opponents of bank branching argued that banks could grow too large and exert 
monopoly power. Bankers, especially those in small towns were strong supporters of 
branch restrictions. They believe it protected them from competition from larger out of 
town banks. Other states believe that larger, more geographically diversified banks 
would be more resilient and safer. While there is much disagreement about whether unit 
banking or branch networks were safer, banking panics were common in this era. Here 
are two famous quotes about this time.  
 

Banking and Financial Institutions 
Professor Rustom Irani 
10 
 
 
The first points out how frequent banking panics were back then and the second points 
out how they eventually became global in scope. Panics work like this. Typically, some 
depositors began to worry about losing their savings. Why did this happen? Well, these 
depositors began to worry that the economy might be taking a turn for the worse and 
their bank might incur large losses on their loans and eventually fail. Remember that 
this was before we had deposit insurance. This means that only those depositors who 
failed to withdraw their money in time would lose out. Hence the run on the bank. These 
banking panics peaked during the Great Depression of the 1930s. This was probably 

Banking and Financial Institutions 
Professor Rustom Irani 
11 
the worst global financial crisis in modern history. More than one-third of all banks failed 
in the United States, millions of families lost their life savings and the economy crashed.  
 
 
As an emergency response to the banking crisis and ensuing depression, President 
Franklin Roosevelt enacted the Banking Act of 1933. This famous piece of legislation is 
also known as the Glass-Steagall Act. What changes were put in place. There was a 
ban on interstate bank branching. This was a geographical restriction on banking. 
Banks were not permitted to have subsidiaries across state borders. There was a ban 
on investment banking. Commercial banks were banned from having underwriting or 
from dealing in private securities, or even writing insurance. The law included regulation 
Q, which banned interest on deposit accounts. Finally, the act created the Federal 
Deposit Insurance Corporation. The FDIC provided insurance to individual depositors if 
their bank failed, they would not lose their savings. These bands reflected beliefs about 
the causes of bank panics. Interstate branching caused panics to spread like wildfire. 
Investment banking was too risky. The payment of interest on deposits led to excessive 
competition among banks. Bank runs were caused by confused investors Worried about 
losing their savings. The Glass-Steagall Act created a highly regulated and protected 
commercial banking industry.  
 

Banking and Financial Institutions 
Professor Rustom Irani 
12 
 
This graph shows the number of insured commercial banks between 1935 and 1956. It 
shows unit banks and banks with multiple branches. During this period, there were a 
large and stable number of banks. These were mostly unit banks with local monopolies. 
This was a system of government insured banks with simple product offerings and 
limited risk taking opportunities. The Glass-Steagall Act restored confidence in the 
banking system.  
 
 

Banking and Financial Institutions 
Professor Rustom Irani 
13 
This chart shows bank failures plummeted from a peak of around 4,000 in 1933 to 
effectively 0. However, at that time, many critics viewed the heavily regulated US 
banking system as far too fragmented and inefficient. 

Banking and Financial Institutions 
Professor Rustom Irani 
14 
Lesson 2-1.2: Bank Holding Companies 
 
The next dominant organizational form to emerge was the Bank Holding Company or 
BHC. A holding company is a shell corporation that owns a group of other firms or 
subsidiaries. A bank holding company owns one or more bank subsidiaries. For 
example, let's say it's 1950 and I own a very successful bank in Champaign and I want 
to expand my operations to Saint Clair County say because I want to geographically 
diversify. Now Illinois only allows unit banking, so this is impossible. One way to evade 
the restriction on branching is to first launch an entirely separate bank in Saint Clair and 
then second I can establish a holding company that acquires both banks. These banks 
subsidiaries may be considered independent banks and therefore in compliance with 
the law.  
 

Banking and Financial Institutions 
Professor Rustom Irani 
15 
 
For good measure, why not have my holding company open up a non-bank subsidiary 
that offers some wealth management services as well. Since this non-bank is not 
directly affiliated with any bank then I'm probably okay. Right? 
 
 
This type of behavior is often called regulatory arbitrage since it exploited loopholes in 
the law. With the 1956 and 1970 Bank Holding Company Acts, Congress attempted to 
close these loopholes but by that point the cat was well and truly out of the bag.  

Banking and Financial Institutions 
Professor Rustom Irani 
16 
 
I've now expanded on our earlier chart into the 1980s. As it shows by the 1980s, bank 
branching often via these bank holding companies became the dominant organizational 
form. Some view the period from 1935 until 1980 as the heyday of US commercial 
banking. Banks had monopoly power as an industry. This gave rise to the famous 3-6-3 
rule of commercial banking.  
 
 
Here's a quote, “American bankers for decades operated by the 3-6-3 rule, pay 
depositors three percent interest, lend money at six percent, and tee off at the golf 

Banking and Financial Institutions 
Professor Rustom Irani 
17 
course by 3.00 PM. They could afford to be that precise because federal and state laws 
set the strict rules by which they operated and protected them from competitors”.  
  
 
“As a result the power and prestige of bankers remained as secure as their vaults while 
the profits were steady and certain.” However, all of that began to change beginning in 
the 1970s and '80s. Suddenly all that's gone.  
 
 
Bankers now face the most strenuous survival test since the Great Depression.  

Banking and Financial Institutions 
Professor Rustom Irani 
18 
 
 
Back to our chart. The number of unique commercial banks in the United States peaked 
around 1985. After that there was a collapse in the number of separate institutions. This 
was a period of dramatic consolidation by 1999, the number of banks had roughly 
halved to around 8,000.  
 
 
So what were the main causes of this consolidation? First, technology. Beginning in the 
1970s the local nature of banking became less important as mail, telephones, fax 

Banking and Financial Institutions 
Professor Rustom Irani 
19 
machines, and eventually the Internet became prevalent. We lost the need to walk into 
a neighborhood bank and speak to a loan officer in person. Nowadays, we can manage 
our deposits, debit card, mortgage payment, all of that stuff from our smart phones. I 
can get a loan online from a bank on the other side of the country. All this began in the 
1970s. The second major shift came from financial innovations in debt markets. This 
was an assault on traditional banks in terms of their ability to raise deposits and make 
loans. Substitutes for deposits arrived. As we mentioned before, under-regulation queue 
banks were limited in their ability to pay interest on deposit accounts. Beginning in the 
1980s, money market mutual funds came on the scene. These mutual funds are non-
banks that also offer deposit like accounts, super safe, very convenient, but these funds 
are not subject to regulation queue. Substitutes for bank loans also arrived. In the 1980s 
there was seismic shifts in public bond markets. In terms of corporate finance short-term 
commercial paper and long-term junk bond markets emerged and then securitization 
which created a brand new funding model for bank loans. This caused further disruption 
for the banking industry. These were the major sources of competitive pressure for 
banks. Local banking monopolies were disrupted. This force banks to make hard 
choices, go out of business, scale up organically or scale up via merger or acquisition. 
By expanding banks could try and exploit economies of scale and economies of scope 
this usually involves eliminating redundant costs. 
 
 

Banking and Financial Institutions 
Professor Rustom Irani 
20 
Lesson 2-1.3: Deregulation and Modern Banking 
 
This period of competition led to a paradigm shift in bank regulation. Lawmakers and 
regulators became less worried about excessive bank risk taking or monopolistic banks. 
They became more worried about banks closing down because they were unable to 
compete. Two major pieces of legislation modernized the commercial banking industry. 
Both were signed into law by President Bill Clinton. These deregulations were designed 
to help banks increase their efficiency by exploiting economies of scale and economies 
of scope. First came the Riegle-Neal Act. This allowed banks to diversify geographically 
by operating across state borders. Nowadays, banks are free to expand their operations 
throughout the United States, say, by acquiring another bank in another state. Unit 
banking is a thing of the past. Second, we have the Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act. This law 
repealed the ban on investment banking found in the Glass-Steagall Act of 1933. Now, 
commercial banking, investment banking, and insurance underwriting could all be done 
under the same roof. This allows banks to diversify across product lines. Banks are in 
the business of information. Operating across multiple product lines might lower 
information costs. For example, if I know that you have a steady income stream arriving 
in your checking account, then I might be more willing to cut you a deal on your life 
insurance. Or if you are a business that I have lent to in the past, then I might be well 
positioned to underwrite your next bond issue. This deregulation kicked off another 
round of consolidation and reorganization.  
 

Banking and Financial Institutions 
Professor Rustom Irani 
21 
 
This included a wave of mega mergers creating some of the largest banks in the world, 
JPMorgan Chase, Bank of America, Wells Fargo.  
  
Here is our chart showing the number of US banks one last time. By the end of the time 
series, we can see branched banks now dominate.  
 

Banking and Financial Institutions 
Professor Rustom Irani 
22 
 
Finally, here we see Bank of America's geographic footprint, this is in 2010. Each dot 
represents a bank branch. The largest banks now operate just about everywhere in the 
United States.  
 
 
Today, a handful of mega banks provide a broad array of financial services, all under 
one roof.  
These institutions are organized as financial holding companies. They contain 
thousands of bank and nonbank subsidiaries.  

Banking and Financial Institutions 
Professor Rustom Irani 
23 
 
 
Here is JPMorgan Chase again. Its main activities include retail and commercial 
banking, investment banking. It also includes the functions of a securities firm, so 
broker-dealer activities. There's also asset management. JPMorgan runs a collection of 
mutual funds and hedge funds through its asset management arm. With this new 
organizational structure, modern banks have a greater emphasis on fee generation. 
Investment banks and securities firms earn fees from the services they provide. The 3-
6-3 model of banking is a thing of the past.  
 

Banking and Financial Institutions 
Professor Rustom Irani 
24 
Let's wrap up. In this session, we have discussed banking from the early 20th century, 
all the way through to the present day. Early banks were simple. They focused on 
deposit taking and lending, often in one physical location. Regulations were strict. Over 
time, new technology and competition from nonbanks eroded the market position of our 
traditional banks. A wave of deregulation followed, designed to help our banks 
modernize. Banks were permitted to expand geographically and into new product 
markets. This gave rise to the financial holding company structure and the concentrated 
banking industry that we see today. Was there too much deregulation? Have some 
mega banks become too big to fail? The largest U.S. banks were central to the 2008 
financial crisis, which suggests that the answer might be yes. We will address this 
complex question and what regulators have done about it at another time. 
 
 

Banking and Financial Institutions 
Professor Rustom Irani 
25 
Lesson 2-2: Organization and Functions of Modern Banks 
Lesson 2-2.1: Bank Types and Borrowing 
 
We interact with banks, probably more often than any other financial institution out 
there. Banks provide a broad set of financial services. They safely store our money, 
provide us with access to the payment system. They give us access to financial 
markets. And they make loans to creditworthy borrowers. The larger banks of financial 
supermarkets that offer both commercial and investment banking services all under the 
same roof. In this session, we are going to focus on the business model of commercial 
banks. We will describe how commercial banks raise funds, how they borrow, and what 
they do with them, how they lend. Along the way we will make the distinction between 
retail and wholesale banking. Let's start by defining what a commercial bank is. A 
commercial bank is a financial institution that takes deposits and makes consumer real 
estate and business loans. Historically, commercial banks would cater to businesses. 
That's why they have the commercial label. But nowadays they serve households and 
individuals as well. We usually classify commercial banks according to their size and 
function.  
    

Banking and Financial Institutions 
Professor Rustom Irani 
26 
 
At one extreme, we have the community banks. These are small banks that serve 
consumers and small businesses in their communities. They take deposits locally from 
people like you and me, and they lend these funds out locally also to people like you 
and me. This is what we call retail banking. In terms of size, they have assets under 
management. This will mostly be loans under $1 billion.  
   
 
Next up, we have the regional or super regional banks. These are larger than 
community banks. They have assets ranging from tens of billions of dollars to more than 

Banking and Financial Institutions 
Professor Rustom Irani 
27 
a trillion dollars. They will be headquartered in larger cities and can have offices and 
branches that run throughout the country. Some are organized as financial holding 
companies with multiple bank and non-bank subsidiaries. The commercial banking arm 
of the business operates on a larger scale. We have retail lending, but we also have 
wholesale lending, which means commercial and industrial lending to large corporate 
customers. They also have access to wholesale funding markets. This means that in 
addition to borrowing from retail depositors through branch networks, these banks can 
also borrow funds in debt markets. I will be more specific about these borrowed funds in 
just a moment.  
 
 
This brings us to the money center banks. These are mega banks that rely on 
wholesale funding to support their lending activities.  
 

Banking and Financial Institutions 
Professor Rustom Irani 
28 
The US based money center banks are located primarily in New York City, and they sit 
at the center of the interbank loan and currency exchange markets. Citigroup is a 
money center bank. Wells Fargo is a mega bank, but it also has the largest branch 
network in the country. It can easily obtain deposit funding. Wells is a super-regional 
bank.  
 
 
Commercial banks borrow, lend and earn the spread. They borrow and pay some 
expenses on that, and then they lend and earn some interest on those investments. 

Banking and Financial Institutions 
Professor Rustom Irani 
29 
What does this actually mean in practice? How do banks borrow? How do banks lend? 
Okay, let's start on the funding side. Banks get their funding from savers. They raise 
deposits from individuals and businesses to convince depositors to lend them money. 
Banks offer safety and convenience. Banks can also borrow from businesses and other 
financial institutions through financial markets. This usually requires interest payments.  
 
 
There are two types of deposit accounts. Transaction accounts that include demand 
deposits. These are our checking accounts. They pay no interest, but we can withdraw 
our funds whenever we want. Non transaction deposits include savings accounts and 
small certificates of deposit. These are savings instruments that usually offer us some 
interest payments. In exchange, these deposits are a bit harder to access. We might 
only be able to make a limited number of withdrawals per month or with a CD. There 
might be a significant penalty for early redemptions. Borrowing is the second major 
source of funds, especially for the larger banks. One bank with a funding shortfall can 
borrow from another bank in the interbank market. This is also called the Federal Funds 
Market. These are short term unsecured loans. Banks can borrow on a secured basis 
using a financial instrument called a repurchase agreement or a repo. Repo borrowing 
works a lot like a pawn shop. Let's say I'd really need a few 100 bucks to buy tickets to 
the next deadline I basketball game.  
 

Banking and Financial Institutions 
Professor Rustom Irani 
30 
 
I can take my golf clubs to a pawn shop. We all agree that these clubs are worth $500. 
The pawn shop guy will take the clubs and give me 400. This is a $400 loan secured by 
the clubs, and then next week after I cash my paycheck, I can buy my golf clubs back 
for the full $500, and if I don't show up next week, the pawnshop guy gets to keep my 
clubs. This is basically how a repurchase agreement works.  
 
 

Banking and Financial Institutions 
Professor Rustom Irani 
31 
When banks do this, they post high quality securities such as Treasury bills to borrow 
cash overnight from cash-rich institutional investors such as pension funds.  
 
 
The trouble with repos and other short term borrowed funds is that they tend to 
disappear when investors get worried. It was famously observed that the panic of 2007 
was a run on the repo market. The volume of outstanding repos collapsed almost 
overnight, so some banks lost a really important source of funds. Lehman Brothers was 
a prime example of this.  

Banking and Financial Institutions 
Professor Rustom Irani 
32 
 
 
We can classify funding sources in terms of how expensive they are and how are 
unable they are. Retail deposits can require a large infrastructure and a lot of fixed costs 
to bring in. However, this funding is cheap on the margin, and because of government 
backed deposit insurance, it tends to stay within the banking system during panics. 
Wholesale funding is the opposite. Banks have to pay competitive rates to attract it, and 
during bad times, it tends to run away. Bank capital is the last piece of the funding 
puzzle. This is the owner's investment in the bank. It mainly consists of common and 
preferred stock, and just like any business, it includes retained earnings or the profits 
that are reinvested in the bank. Unlike debt, bank capital never matures, so it is as 
sticky as it gets. However, because equity is subject to price risk, it is more expensive to 
raise than deposits. 

Banking and Financial Institutions 
Professor Rustom Irani 
33 
Lesson 2-2.2: Bank Lending 
 
Let's move on to bank lending. We are going to divide our discussion into three parts. 
First, we are going to discuss loans. Second, we will run through the types of customers 
that banks deal with on the lending side. Third, we will talk about the actual mechanics 
of bank lending. We will describe how a loan comes into existence. Formally, what is a 
loan? Well, it's a financial instrument, it is debt. When I borrow from a bank I am 
entering into a legally binding commitment to repay according to some predetermined 
contractual terms.  
 

Banking and Financial Institutions 
Professor Rustom Irani 
34 
There will be an interest rate. This rate may be variable or it may be fixed. The loan may 
be secured by some collateral. There might be performance-related clauses written into 
the contract, these are called covenants. Senior debt gets the first priority on business 
assets in the case of bankruptcy. Banks usually break their lending business down into 
two categories: consumer credits and commercial lending. Consumer credit includes 
loans backed by residential real estate. This includes mortgages and home equity 
loans. We also have credit cards, auto loans, and student loans. Commercial and 
industrial lending includes loans to businesses. These can be commercial real estate 
loans, term loans which include long-term lending for investment, or business lines of 
credit which act a lot like credit cards for businesses and can be used for working 
capital.  
 

Banking and Financial Institutions 
Professor Rustom Irani 
35 
 
Let's take a look at the customer base of commercial banks. Who do banks lend to? 
Larger businesses tend to bypass commercial banks and borrow directly from financial 
markets. They issue bonds and raise equity finance. There is lots of public information 
about these firms and information costs are small. Sometimes the larger firms will use 
commercial banks to arrange loans when they are in a special situation. This could be a 
takeover transaction or a troubled debt restructuring. Middle market lending is the bread 
and butter of the commercial banking business. This is sometimes called relationship 
lending. These are medium-sized firms with limited public information. They are 
probably not listed on a public stock exchange and investors might be worried about 
adverse selection. Finding your business customers, performing credit analyses, 
funding new loans, and maintaining relationships. This is the central role of loan officers 
and credit committees at most banks. Small and new businesses typically do not have 
access to bank credit without some form of guarantee. These can be personal 
guarantees of the business owner, the Small Business Administration may partially 
guarantee these loans. The business owner might pledge his personal assets as 
collateral. Houses, boats, other financial wealth. Small businesses are risky and often 
fail. Guarantees and collateral help reduce the risk and bring banks on board. Among 
loans to individuals, mortgage credit is the core focus of community and regional banks. 
These loans are also information sensitive and can depend on the individual 
circumstances of the borrower. Credit cards, student loans, and auto loans, these tend 
to be small and costly to make on a per loan basis. There are large economies of scale 
in this market and so larger banks and non-banks that can create big diversified pools of 
these loans tend to dominate this space.  
 

Banking and Financial Institutions 
Professor Rustom Irani 
36 
 
We can see where these different customers show up across JPMorgan Chase's 
business segments. Their consumer and community banking arm is what I have been 
calling retail banking. Consumer and business banking means deposit-taking and 
providing consumer credits and small business loans through the branch network. 
Home lending covers residential mortgages and home equity loans. The card and auto 
segment takes care of credit cards and auto loans and leases. This is all for individuals 
and small businesses. Commercial banking sits within the wholesale banking business. 
Commercial real estate includes financing for office space, property development, 
industrial space, and so on. For business banking, JPMorgan separates out its clients 
into two groups: middle-market and corporate clients.  
 

Banking and Financial Institutions 
Professor Rustom Irani 
37 
 
According to their investor reports, middle-market banking covers small and mid-sized 
companies with annual revenues between $200 and $500 million. Smaller than this 
means you are in the community banking bucket. Corporate client banking covers large 
corporations with annual revenues between $500 and two billion dollars. Bigger than 
this means that the investment banking arm will take care of you.  
 
 
So we can map JPMorgan's business model onto our diagram from before. Here is the 
wholesale business, it covers lending to middle-market firms, and here is the retail 

Banking and Financial Institutions 
Professor Rustom Irani 
38 
business. It covers lending to small businesses and individuals. OK. That's an overview 
of the commercial bank business model. Banks raise funds from a variety of sources 
and grant a broad array of loans. 
 
 

Banking and Financial Institutions 
Professor Rustom Irani 
39 
Lesson 2-2.3: Changes in the Lending Process 
 
Before we close our discussion, I want to do two things. First, I want to be a bit more 
precise about the lending process itself. Second, I want to explain how this lending 
process has changed in the past 50 years or so. Okay, there are three necessary steps 
in the lending process. Origination, financing, and servicing. Origination is about 
granting the loan. A loan officer will meet with a client and determine whether they are 
credit worthy. This will involve a careful analysis of the borrower's financial situation or 
business plan. The loan officer will negotiate terms, the loan amount, the maturity rates 
and fees, collateral and so on. We have called this step screening in our past 
discussion. Next comes the financing. After committing to lend, the bank will have to 
come up with the actual funds to give to the borrower. And finally we have servicing, this 
step involves the bank continuing the relationship with the borrower after the loan has 
been made. The bank collects payments from the borrower. The bank monitors the 
borrower's progress and financial condition to maximize the chances that the bank is 
repaid in full.  
 

Banking and Financial Institutions 
Professor Rustom Irani 
40 
 
Traditionally, a bank would do all three steps. It grants the loan, it finances the loan 
users using deposits, and it keeps the loan on the books collecting loan payments along 
the way until the loan matures. This is what we call the originate and hold model of 
banking.  
  
 
Now, here comes the fun part. In the modern era, each of these three steps can be 
separated out into what's called the originate and distribute model of banking. Under 
this business model, commercial banks focus on fee income.  

Banking and Financial Institutions 
Professor Rustom Irani 
41 
 
 
They still meet with the borrower and originate the loan. That part hasn't changed, 
although sometimes this is done with the help of a broker. In the mortgage market, you 
might have run into an online broker that connects you with a lender for a fee. Some 
other financial institution provides the financing that pays for your house. This can be an 
investor such as an insurance company or there could be an extra step in this process 
called securitization. The bank may do the servicing, but even this is sometimes 
outsourced. Rather than making your monthly payment to the bank, you make it to a 
mortgage servicer who then passes that payment on to the investors. Why do this? 
Well, if some banks are really good at minimizing information costs and approving the 
best borrowers for loans, then the theory of comparative advantage tells us that they 
should focus on that activity. And some other silent partner can come along and provide 
the dollars.  
 

Banking and Financial Institutions 
Professor Rustom Irani 
42 
 
This is what the originate and distribute model is all about. One final thought. This 
theory might break down as we arrive in the 21st century. Nowadays, Fintech players 
like Rocket Mortgage have disrupted the mortgage market. As a consumer, if I am 
refinancing my mortgage or if I am a great borrower that meets a certain quality 
threshold, then I can quickly and conveniently get a loan from an online lender. Why do 
banks have a comparative advantage in this situation? We are seeing similar entry in 
the business lending space by Amazon and other tech firms. These firms collect huge 
amounts of information in real time about customer interest and business sales. 
Perhaps Amazon is better positioned to decide which borrowers should be granted a 
loan. We shall have to wait and see.  
 

Banking and Financial Institutions 
Professor Rustom Irani 
43 
 
Okay, let's wrap up. In this session, we took a close look at the commercial banking 
business. We described how banks borrow and lend. We made the distinction between 
retail and wholesale banking. Retail banking is about raising funds and lending locally. 
Wholesale banking is done on a bigger scale. Finally, we introduced the originate and 
distribute model of banking. This model makes sense if commercial banks have a 
comparative advantage at selecting the best borrowers. 
 
 

Banking and Financial Institutions 
Professor Rustom Irani 
44 
Lesson 2-2.4: How Are Investment Banks Organized? 
Investment banks provide businesses and other entities with access to financial 
markets. If you are a business that wants a loan you can go to a commercial bank. If 
you are a business that wants to sell stocks and bonds you go to an investment bank. If 
you are a high-net-worth individual that wants to execute a trade, then you might also 
call your investment banker. This is an oversimplification but it's not too far from the 
truth. In this session, we want to understand the who, what, when, where, how, why, of 
investment banking. Our goal is to first define what an investment bank is, and then 
understand what these financial institutions do and how they're organized. Investment 
banks connect borrowers and savers directly in financial markets.  
 

Banking and Financial Institutions 
Professor Rustom Irani 
45 
 
Investment banks have three main business lines. The first is financing. Investment 
banks originates, underwrites, and place securities and financial markets on behalf of 
their customers. These customers are primarily large corporations and governments. 
Second, since investment banks are already in the business of creating and selling 
securities, most are involved in securities trading. They execute buy and sell orders for 
their customers and often trade to make profits for themselves. Investment banks also 
help to facilitate mergers and acquisitions or other corporate restructuring activities. All 
of these activities generate fees, underwriting fees, commissions for executing trades, 
and fees for giving advice. This can be a very profitable business and unlike commercial 
banking, it does not require long-term funding or extensive branch networks.  
 

Banking and Financial Institutions 
Professor Rustom Irani 
46 
 
Let's take a look at the investment banking corporate structure starting with JPMorgan 
Chase. Ok, here we have JPMorgan's business segments. We can see the corporate 
and investment bank over here. It sits within the wholesale business arm of the bank. 
This means that we are dealing with big clients and not retail customers like you or me. 
The investment bank consists of two businesses – Banking, and Markets. According to 
their annual report banking means advising on corporate strategy and structure, as well 
as capital raising and equity, debt markets, and syndicated loan markets. The markets 
business covers trading in cash and derivative instruments, as well as brokerage 
services. M&A advisory, securities underwriting, and securities trading. That's the 
business.  
 

Banking and Financial Institutions 
Professor Rustom Irani 
47 
 
And here is the fees for JPMorgan who is the global market leader. In 2020 they 
captured about $8.5 billion of investment banking fees. That is a sizable chunk of their 
annual revenue. There are many specialized firms in the investment banking industry. 
Some focus just on brokerage services; other boutique investment banks focus on 
capital raising for a particular industry. However, we can classify the largest full-service 
investment banks into three buckets.  
 
 

Banking and Financial Institutions 
Professor Rustom Irani 
48 
First, we have the JPMorgan's of the world. The investment banking arm of JPMorgan is 
a subsidiary of a commercial bank holding company. These are the largest investment 
banks and they have a customer base that includes corporations, governments, 
financial institutions, and high-net-worth individuals. Second, we have investment banks 
that tend to have a more specialized customer base. Goldman Sachs is investment 
banking business, tends to focus more on corporations and customers that are more 
active in securities trading. Finally, we have the standalone investment banks like 
Lazard. These firms offer a full range of investment banking services but have a limited 
geographic footprint. They tend to just operate in major cities and they tend to focus on 
larger clients.  
 
 
I just set the term standalone without really explaining what it means. Well, this is an 
industry that has gone through some major changes. In the past, we had several 
prominent independent investment banks. JPMorgan, Merrill Lynch, Bear Stearns, 
Lehman Brothers, Morgan Stanley. Today the largest firms have merged with 
commercial banks and now sit within the holding company structure. This is what I 
mean by standalone versus affiliated with a commercial bank. Two merger waves 
brought us to this industry structure. First, regulatory changes in the late 1990s 
permitted commercial and investment banking activities to happen at the same firm. 
This cause several commercial banks to acquire or set up their own investment banks. 
And second, the financial crisis. This caused a wave of distressed acquisitions. By the 
end of 2008, Lehman Brothers was bankrupt, Bear Stearns and Merrill Lynch were 
acquired by commercial banks, and Goldman Sachs and Morgan Stanley had to 
reorganize as commercial banks in order to survive.  
 

Banking and Financial Institutions 
Professor Rustom Irani 
49 
 
Here is a list of the 10 biggest combinations in the US investment banking industry. 
Citigroup was formed by the merger of Citicorp, a commercial bank and Travelers, 
which was an insurance company that owned an investment bank. This merger 
happened in 1998. At the same time as the passage of the Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act. 
Chase acquired JPMorgan soon after. Here is Bank of America acquiring Merrill Lynch 
in 2008. This was the largest distressed acquisition during that financial crisis.  
 
 

Banking and Financial Institutions 
Professor Rustom Irani 
50 
Here is a breakdown of investment banking revenue in 2020. We can see the top ten 
investment banks globally. Only Jefferies is a stand-alone firm. The rest are affiliated 
with commercial banks and take deposits from retail customers. These 10 banks collect 
about 50 percent of the fees globally, and the market leader collects around 10 percent. 
So while there has been a lot of consolidation, this is still a fairly competitive market, at 
least on a global scale. 
 
 

Banking and Financial Institutions 
Professor Rustom Irani 
51 
Lesson 2-2.5: Investment Banking Activities 
 
Ok, let's get into the nuts and bolts of the investment banking business model. First, 
let's take a closer look at securities underwriting. We will focus on equity, bond, and 
syndicated loan underwriting. This activity provides the bulk of investment banking fees. 
Let's say a company wants to raise $500 million by selling financial instruments. This 
could be equity. It could be debt.  
 
An investment bank will intermediate this process. In fact, usually several investment 

Banking and Financial Institutions 
Professor Rustom Irani 
52 
banks will compete to win the mandate to lead that underwriting process. The lead 
underwriter will be responsible for setting the terms of the deal and managing the sale 
of the newly issued financial instruments. Let's consider the case of inequity sell. If a 
firm is selling equity for the first time, this is called an initial public offering or IPO. A 
listed firm can sell more equity in a follow-on deal. This is also called a seasoned 
offering. The investment bank will meet with the business and the potential investors to 
negotiate a price and interest in purchasing shares. This process is called book-
building. The investment bank may be responsible for buying the entire issue at a 
guarantee price and selling it at another to outside investors. Hopefully, this price will be 
higher. The spread between the price they buy and the price that they sell determines 
their profits. Assuming the investment bank buys 100 million shares at a negotiated 
price of $5 per share and sells those shares at a price of $5.25 each, then a spread of 
$0.25 will yield a nice profit of $25 million. These profits are not guaranteed. Morgan 
Stanley famously mispriced Facebook's IPO and its share price lost nearly 50% in the 
subsequent weeks. It took a full 16 months to return back to the initial valuation of $38 
per share. The underwriter would like to set an offering price that clears its inventory at 
a profit. However, that price should reflect a fair valuation of the business. Otherwise the 
bank may risk damaging its reputation and future business prospects. Bond 
underwriting follows a similar process.  
 
 
Let's instead consider a syndicated loan, that's a more interesting case. Usually, a 
commercial bank would ground a business line. However, when these loans are very 
big, this might be too risky. For these large loans, a group of banks and other lenders 
may come together and collectively fund the deal to our borrower. This allows them to 
spread the risk among themselves. Here, the underwriting bang-boom negotiate terms 
of the loan on behalf of the lending syndicate. They will be responsible for both the 
origination step and the servicing step in the lending process. Leading the syndicate will 

Banking and Financial Institutions 
Professor Rustom Irani 
53 
generate a lot of fees for the underwriting bank. The other syndicate members who act 
more like silent partners that provide funding for the loan. These other lenders will earn 
the usual interest income from investing in a loan until it matures.  
 
 
Suppose Firm X would like to buy target firm Y or a segment of target firm Y but does 
not know the correct price. Suppose firm Z wants to diverse the division and needs help 
finding potential buyers. Investment banks are frequently involved in negotiating and 
executing deals of this kind. They conduct research on potential acquisition targets.. Or, 
they assist sellers to find buyers. They are experts in estimating the value of public and 
private companies using financial modeling techniques. And then in terms of financing, 
the M&A advising bank can also assist with underwriting new securities to finance the 
deal. Any of the underwriting options, equity, debt, syndicated loans. They're all on the 
table. Finalizing the details of M&A transactions can be complicated both from a 
financial and legal standpoint. Investment banks are well compensated for the advice 
and services that they provide.  
 

Banking and Financial Institutions 
Professor Rustom Irani 
54 
Ok, here are the various investment banking products. We have fees from underwriting 
equity, bonds, syndicated loans. Here we can see a breakdown by initial public offering 
and follow-on offerings. For debt, we see a breakdown by investment grade. These are 
companies with good credit ratings and then below investment grade firms. In 2020, 
total fee revenues from equity underwriting, from bond underwriting, and M&A related 
activities were all about the same order of magnitude. Fees from syndicated lending 
were about half as much.  
 

Banking and Financial Institutions 
Professor Rustom Irani 
55 
 
Securities trading is the other key activity of investment banks. This consists of market-
making and proprietary trading. Market-making occurs when an investment bank 
creates a market where investors can come together and trade securities. There are 
many other securities firms that do this, but investment banks play a central role. 
Brokers execute trades on behalf of their customers, earning a fee or commission along 
the way. Let's say our investment bank buys a Facebook stock at an ask price of $20 
and sells it to a customer at the bid price of $21. Then it will earn $1 profit. This profit is 
called the bid-ask spread. The dealer arm of an investment bank may carry some stock 
in his inventory. In this case you might find yourself buying the Facebook stock from the 
bank itself rather than the bank trading in markets on your behalf. Combining securities 
dealing and underwriting has clear synergies. If I'm an investment bank that underwrites 
a new stock issue than it is easy for me to carry some leftover stock in my inventory. 
Proprietary trading is when a bank takes an active position in a financial instrument to 
make a profit. They are not assisting customers, they are trying to make a profit for 
themselves. A position trade involves taking a long or short position in a security for 
several weeks or several months in anticipation of a favorable price movements. 
Arbitrage trading usually involves exploiting small temporary mispricing in financial 
markets. This mispricing should not exist, at least not in theory, and so this presents an 
opportunity to make a profit. It can also make markets more liquid and prices more 
efficient.  
 

Banking and Financial Institutions 
Professor Rustom Irani 
56 
 
Here is one final chart. It shows total investment banking and trading revenues for the 
12 largest U.S. and European institutions. Total revenues in 2020 were just shy of $200 
billion. About   $150 billion of that came from fixed income and equity trading. So that's 
around 75%. The remaining 25 percent came from investment banking fees.  
 
 
Ok, in this session, we have covered the main activities of investment banks. Securities 
underwriting. Investment banks help firms issue new securities and place them with 
investors. Trading. Investment banks assist in the trading of securities that are already 

Banking and Financial Institutions 
Professor Rustom Irani 
57 
out there and then there's corporate strategy. All three avenues are important sources 
of fee-based income for investment banks. Finally, this is an industry that has gone 
through some dramatic changes.  
Standalone investment banks are few and far between. The largest investment banks 
now sit within bank holding companies structures. 
Lesson 2-3: Financial Statement Analysis of Modern Banks 
Lesson 2-3.1: Balance Sheet 
 
We have discussed how banks are organized as firms and we have discussed how the 
banking industry and bank business model has evolved. We know that commercial 
banks mostly raise deposits and grant loans. Some of the larger firms also do 
investment banking. In this session, we will firm up our understanding of what banks do. 
We will take a close look at the balance sheets of commercial bank holding companies. 
Remember that a balance sheet provides a list of investments on the asset side and 
sources of funds on the liability side. We will examine JP Morgan Chase's balance 
sheet as a case study. We will also examine what is called the consolidated balance 
sheet of the entire commercial banking industry.  
 

Banking and Financial Institutions 
Professor Rustom Irani 
58 
 
Here is a simple representation of the balance sheet of a commercial bank. On the 
asset side of the balance sheet, we can see what banks do with the funds they raise. 
Some cash in the vault, we have loans. These could be mortgages, business loans, or 
loans to households. There are the tables and chairs that the loan officers sit on, and 
there are some other financial assets. These can be government bonds, corporate 
bonds, and other securities. On the liability side, we see how the bank is funded. This 
will include some customer deposits, checking and savings accounts. The bank may 
also raise some wholesale funding in the money market. Bank owners may also retain 
some earnings within the firm rather than paying them out, or sell some additional 
shares. The larger commercial bank holding companies have significant market making 
and securities trading activities.  
 

Banking and Financial Institutions 
Professor Rustom Irani 
59 
 
We, therefore, separate out the balance sheet into the banking book and the trading 
book. The banking book represents the long-term borrowing and lending activities of our 
traditional bank. These activities produce some interest income and fees from lending. 
The trading book contains investments in securities, commodities, and currencies that 
can be quickly bought and sold in financial markets. Long positions are recorded at 
market value on the asset side; short positions which involve borrowing are recorded as 
liabilities. The trading portfolio produces trading gains and losses that are booked as 
non-interest income and expenses. We shall see where these profits show up in the 
income statement in another session.  
 

Banking and Financial Institutions 
Professor Rustom Irani 
60 
 
Let's take a look at JP Morgan Chase's balance sheet. Please keep in mind that this is 
one of the largest and most complex banks on the planet. I'm going to focus on the most 
important items, and even then this is going to be a bit messy. Okay. Here we go. This 
is the consolidated balance sheet across the retail and wholesale business segments, 
2020 data, and all the numbers you see are in millions of dollars. We see assets. Total 
assets are about $3.4 trillion. Yes, that's trillion with a T. We see liabilities. One way or 
another this is borrowed money. Liabilities add up to about $3.1 trillion. Total funding – 
that's debt plus equity – has to equal assets. So stockholder's equity must be equal to 
the difference between assets and liabilities, so about $300 billion.  
 

Banking and Financial Institutions 
Professor Rustom Irani 
61 
Let's take a closer look at the asset side. Which investments are most important for JP 
Morgan? First, we can see cash held at the bank plus cash parked in deposit accounts 
at other banks. These deposit accounts at other banks help facilitate payments between 
banks and they might also earn some interest. These two items are usually added up in 
cold cash. Cash is the most liquid asset that banks carry in their balance sheets. 
Second, we have federal funds sold and reverse repo agreements. This is JP Morgan 
lending to other financial institutions, such as banks on a short-term basis. Third, we 
have trading account assets. These are securities held in a short-term basis with the 
intent to sell as part of a position or arbitrage trade. Investment securities, on the other 
hand, are long-term investments in-debt securities that are not part of the bank's trading 
portfolio. Finally, we have loans. This is the largest item in the balance sheet, about one 
trillion dollars altogether. We can take a closer look at the loans in the retail arm of JP 
Morgan's business.  
 

Banking and Financial Institutions 
Professor Rustom Irani 
62 
 
Of the roughly one trillion dollars of loans, about half are assets in the retail arm. The 
other $500 billion of loans must be coming from the wholesale arm. So that's large loans 
to corporations and governments. We have loans to individuals and small businesses, 
loans that are backed by residential real estate, credit cards, and also auto loans. You 
might have spotted this, but it looks like JP Morgan through its quite extensive branch 
network raises about one trillion dollars of deposits. This is more than the retail banking 
business is lending out. So JP Morgan and other banks do the same thing, use 
relatively cheap and sticky deposit funding to support the other investments that it 
makes.  
 

Banking and Financial Institutions 
Professor Rustom Irani 
63 
 
Now, let's repeat this exercise for the entire banking industry as a whole. Here is what's 
called the consolidated balance sheets of all U.S. commercial banks. This is for the year 
2018. It covers roughly 5,000 commercial banks that existed in the US at that time. The 
government collects these statistics as they monitor the safety and soundness of the 
banking system. Loans are about nine trillion dollars or roughly 55% of the $16.5 trillion 
of total assets. Commercial and residential real estate loans, business loans, and then 
loans to individuals. These are the three largest categories of loans in that order of 
importance. Investment securities are the second most important category with about 
25% of assets. U.S. government securities such as treasury bonds and agency 
mortgage bank securities are the largest subcomponents. These assets can be easily 
sold and are a good backup for a bank's cash reserves. Cash itself is roughly 10% of 
assets.  
 

Banking and Financial Institutions 
Professor Rustom Irani 
64 
 
This chart shows the main investments of banks, securities, real estate, consumer 
credits, business loans, and cash. Cash holdings among banks are actually near 
historic highs. If we look back at the past 40 years or so, banks usually prefer to hold as 
little cash as possible. Every dollar that sits idle in the vault could be invested. However, 
there was a financial crash in 2008, at which time many banks ran out of cash. And in 
the years since 2008, interest rates have been historically low. This has lowered the 
opportunity cost of holding cash. So far, we have considered the assets of the biggest 
bank in the U.S., JP Morgan and an average bank. What about the smallest community 
banks?  
 

Banking and Financial Institutions 
Professor Rustom Irani 
65 
This chart shows the loan portfolio allocation for banks with less than one billion dollars 
of total assets. These are all local retail banks. Here are a couple of things worth noting. 
First, they operate on such a small scale that credit cards do not play any role in their 
business. On a per dollar basis, these loans are just too expensive to originate in 
service. Instead, bigger banks and specialized finance companies deal with large pools 
of credit cards. Second, business lending plays a smaller role than you might have 
thought. Larger banks tend to take care of most of the commercial lending as well. What 
the community banks do? They focus on real estate lending. This includes residential 
and commercial real estate, as well as construction and development loans. They know 
their local markets very well and this seems to be their comparative advantage.  
 

Banking and Financial Institutions 
Professor Rustom Irani 
66 
 
Now let's move on to the funding side of the balance sheet. Those investments are 
either funded by debt or by equity. Commercial banks get funds from depositors and 
they can borrow in money markets. This is debt. Banks can also use equity provided by 
their owners. Here is JP Morgan Chase. Deposits are by far the largest source of 
funding for this bank. This includes checking accounts which are also called transaction 
accounts. The deposits bucket also includes non-transaction accounts. These are 
mostly certificates of deposit which look a lot like short-term bonds. The second most 
important source of funds is borrowed money. At one extreme, this includes short-term 
secure debts. For JP Morgan, this means borrowing through the repo market and at the 
other extreme we have long-term unsecured debt. In this case, JP Morgan issues a 
large amount of long-dated senior bonds. The other categories of debt are less 
important. The last source of funding is bank equity capital. This is funding that comes 
from the owners of the bank.  
 

Banking and Financial Institutions 
Professor Rustom Irani 
67 
 
This consists of paid in capital from the issuance of common and preferred stock. 
However, the majority of JP Morgan's equity comes from retained earnings that are not 
paid out. These are profits that are reinvested into the business. One final point. You 
might have noticed that JP Morgan uses a lot of debt to finance investments. This is a 
common feature of banks and JP Morgan is not an exception. The share of equity and 
total funding is around eight percent. Put differently, the bank's equity multiplier is 
around 12 times.  
 

Banking and Financial Institutions 
Professor Rustom Irani 
68 
Here are the same sources of funds but now for the banking industry as a whole. Again, 
this is 2018 data. The main sources of funds are deposits, borrowings, and equity 
capital. Deposits are mostly held in domestic offices in the United States as opposed to 
overseas. Most of these banks only have domestic operations after all. As we saw 
earlier, total assets for the banking industry in 2018 was about $16.5 trillion. Let's make 
a note of that. Then we can see deposits fund about 77 percent of the investments that 
banks make. Non-deposit borrowings are about 11% of assets, and equity capital which 
is total assets minus liabilities funds the remaining 11% of assets. There is some 
rounding error here, so these percentages don't quite add up to 100.  
 

Banking and Financial Institutions 
Professor Rustom Irani 
69 
 
When we look at the liabilities of banks over a long time horizon, we can see just how 
important deposits are. This is data from the 1970s to present. Deposits have been 
steady between 70% and 80% of total commercial bank assets. Since the 2008 financial 
crisis, banks have become more cautious and our sticky and reliable deposits now play 
an even more important role.  
 
 
Let's wrap up. In this session, we have analyzed the balance sheet of JP Morgan and 
the banking industry as a whole. We have seen data on the key sources and uses of 

Banking and Financial Institutions 
Professor Rustom Irani 
70 
funds at these banks. Loans, securities, and cash on the asset side. Deposits, 
borrowings and capital markets, and equity capital on the funding side. Since the 2008 
financial crisis, banks are carrying more cash and using more deposits to fund their 
investments. Many banks failed at that time. So nowadays, banks are behaving much 
more cautiously. 
 
 

Banking and Financial Institutions 
Professor Rustom Irani 
71 
Lesson 2-3.2: Off Balance Sheet 
In this session, we are going to discuss the off-balance sheet activities of banks. We 
have two goals. First, I want to introduce the concept of a contingent asset and a 
contingent liability. These are items that do not show up in the balance sheets that we 
have seen so far. These items do not show up in the banking book or the trading 
portfolio of a modern bank. However, on the current accounting standards, banks must 
record this information in their financial statements. This ensures that investors and 
regulators are well-informed. Second, I want to describe the most important off-balance 
sheet or OBS activities at banks. I want to give you a sense of the size and the scale of 
this stuff.  
 

Banking and Financial Institutions 
Professor Rustom Irani 
72 
 
Okay. Let's get right to it. To generate fee-based income, banks engage in a broad 
array of activities off the balance sheet. Some of these activities resembled traditional 
bank lending. Other items look more like insurance. What's important to remember is 
that off-balance-sheet activities are contingent in nature. This means that when an 
event occurs, the off-balance sheet item has a material impact on the banks’ balance 
sheets or cash flows. An off-balance sheet assets moves onto the asset side of the 
balance sheet or affects the bank's income when a pre-specified event occurs. The 
simplest example to think of here is a credit card. We are all familiar with credit cards 
they have credit limits that tell us the maximum amount we can use. A bank has 
provided a commitment to lend as much as that limit. Bank's record undrawn credit card 
commitments as off-balance sheet assets. When I charge my credit card, this is the 
contingent events, me charging the card, the bank will converts an off-balance sheet 
assets into an on-balance sheet assets, a consumer loan. In the same way, off-balance 
sheet liabilities will show up on the liability side of the balance sheet or affect the banks 
expenses when an event occurs. These items haven't shown up on the balance sheet 
yet, but they might in the future. Guarantees, which act as a form of insurance are 
common here. The bank writes the insurance today and records it the off the balance 
sheet. If there is an insurance claim tomorrow because the pre-specified event 
happens, then this is going to have a material impact on the banks cash flows. There 
will be a payout. Why do you banks like issuing credit cards and writing insurance? 
Well, because it generates upfront fees.  
 

Banking and Financial Institutions 
Professor Rustom Irani 
73 
 
Here's the balance sheet. We have discussed the bank book and the trading book 
previously and now here is the off-balance sheets. The most important items on the 
asset side are undrawn loan commitments and long derivatives positions. Credit cards 
can be charged in the future and this will create loans in the banking book. Long 
derivatives positions can make profits or losses in the future. What about contingent 
liabilities? Here we also have derivatives, but now these are considered short positions 
that can also make profits or losses and we have our guarantees. These guarantees 
can take a variety of forms but they mostly behave like insurance. Under some 
conditions, the bank will have to make an insurance payouts.  
 

Banking and Financial Institutions 
Professor Rustom Irani 
74 
Here is the data on the key off-balance sheet activities for all commercial banks in the 
United States. We have 1992, which is ancient history, and then we have the 2018 data. 
This information is collected by government agencies that want to make sure that banks 
aren't taking too many risks in these business lines. We are going to pay special 
attention to the unused loan commitments and derivatives. These are by far the most 
important activities. Let's start with loan commitments. A loan commitment is a legally 
binding promise to provide funds up to a certain maximum limits and I'd say pre-
specified interest rate. These promises can be made to households or businesses. They 
can be unsecured credit cards or lines of credit secured by houses. Banks must stand 
by and be ready to provide funds at any time within the commitment period. And when 
that card is charged a loan will arrive in the bank's balance sheet.  
 

Banking and Financial Institutions 
Professor Rustom Irani 
75 
 
This chart is from the FDIC. It shows the utilization rates of the various types of loan 
commitments in recent years – home equity loans, business loans, credit cards. Less 
than 100 % means that there is some undrawn amount sitting off the balance sheet 
somewhere.  
 
 
Let's zoom in on the credit cards. Here we can see some dollar amounts for both the 
drawn and undrawn credit cards. At no point in time did the drawn balances exceed $1 
trillion. However, we can see that 4 to 5 times that amount is undrawn. Banks can earn 

Banking and Financial Institutions 
Professor Rustom Irani 
76 
fees on these undrawn balances. Regulators require that banks disclose these undrawn 
balances in their financial statements. Why? Because excessive drawdowns can create 
risks at banks. Now let's talk about derivatives. Banks can use derivatives to reduce 
their own risk exposure to say unfavorable changes in interest rates. Banks can also act 
as dealers and take the other side of a derivatives trader with a customer for a fee.  
 
 
In either case, the derivatives that are bought and sold may lead to some cash inflow or 
a cash outflow in the future. The bank therefore must record these transactions off the 
balance sheet. The reporting here is done in notional amounts, so for interest rate 
derivatives, which is by far the biggest item. This is a jaw-dropping number, $150 trillion. 
If we think of derivatives as providing insurance, that's how I like to think of it, then this 
tells us about the total value of items being insured.  
 

Banking and Financial Institutions 
Professor Rustom Irani 
77 
 
However, this large number doesn't tell us much about the potential cashflow exposure 
that the bank has or the market value of these positions. For example, I might have $1 
millions of home insurance. This is the notional amount but the insurance costs me 
$2,000. That's the market value of the insurance contract. While notional amounts don't 
mean much the growth rates are actually meaningful. Loan commitments have grown 
more or less in line with the bank balance sheet in the past 30 years about a 5x 
increase. 
 

Banking and Financial Institutions 
Professor Rustom Irani 
78 
Derivatives have shown explosive growth during this time period. Growth has been by a 
factor of 20.  
 
 
Much of this derivatives activity is actually concentrated among the largest financial 
institutions: JP Morgan Chase, Citi Bank, Bank of America, Goldman Sachs, Morgan 
Stanley, Wells Fargo, HSBC. These are the largest dealer banks and having all of this 
activity concentrated in a handful of institutions, reflects economies of scale in this 
business. 

Banking and Financial Institutions 
Professor Rustom Irani 
79 
 
 
Let me illustrate this point with JP Morgan Chase. Here is JP Morgan's derivatives 
exposure in 2020: interest rate derivatives, credit derivatives, FX, equity, and 
commodity contracts. This activity is shown in notional amounts as we've seen so far. 
What has been missing from our discussion is that a mega bank like JP Morgan is 
taking positions in thousands of derivatives transactions. Most of this activities on behalf 
of customers. Here if you look at the interest rate options, you can see JP Morgan is 
both purchasing and selling or writing options at the same time. This may naturally lead 
to some canceling out or netting of exposures. Larger banks with more and more 
transactions may naturally see more netting. You can see this quite clearly with JP 
Morgan's credit default swaps book. You can think of a credit default swap or CDS as 
an insurance contract on a bond or a loan. If the credit defaults, that's our contingency, 
then the insurance pays out. What do the numbers show us?  
 

Banking and Financial Institutions 
Professor Rustom Irani 
80 
 
Well, JP Morgan is involved in about $1 trillion worth of CDS, mind-boggling sums. 
However, this is spread out equally between insurance sold and insurance bought. 
Overall, the net exposure is much smaller. This is how netting works. Hopefully, JP 
Morgan pays a lot less for the insurance that it buys than the fees it collects from selling 
insurance. Then this activity will make a nice profits without creating too much risk 
exposure for the bank. The off-balance sheet contains a list of contingent exposures. 
They have potential to impact the bank's cash flows at some point in the future.  
 

Banking and Financial Institutions 
Professor Rustom Irani 
81 
We saw that loan commitments and derivatives are the most important off-balance-
sheet activities. They generate the most fee income for the bank. We've said nothing 
about risk in this session. Risks that were buried off the balance sheet were at the heart 
of the 2008 financial crisis. These poorly understood risks led to the failure, distressed 
acquisition, or bailout of some of the largest financial institutions in the world. This led to 
a barrage of new regulations. A very interesting topic for another time. 
 

Banking and Financial Institutions 
Professor Rustom Irani 
82 
Lesson 2-3.3: Income Statement 
Commercial banks accept deposits and use the proceeds to make loans to individuals, 
loans to businesses and real estate loans. Banks borrow, lend, and earn the spread. 
The spread is the difference between interest income earned on lending and the interest 
expense paid on deposits. Is this the whole story? Well, not quite. It's a little bit more 
complicated than that. We have seen that modern banks are large and diversified 
businesses. They earn interest income from their lending business and fee revenue 
from other business lines. In this session, we are going to analyze the income statement 
of a bank. We are going to continue with JP Morgan Chase as a case study. We will see 
how the various business lines of JP Morgan generate both interest income and 
expenses as well as fee revenue. This will tell us exactly how a modern bank turns a 
profit.  
 

Banking and Financial Institutions 
Professor Rustom Irani 
83 
 
We can break down the income statement of a bank into three parts. The first tells us 
about the profitability of the lending business. This is the traditional bank. It grants 
loans. It invests in securities. This generates interest income. It raises funds from 
depositors and borrows in financial markets in order to fund those investments. That 
borrowing doesn't come for free. Banks have to pay some interest expense. Net interest 
income is equal to interest income minus interest expense. This is the top line measure 
of bank profitability. What's left? Two items. First, we know that modern banks generate 
a lot of fee income. This is called non-interest revenue. Second is what's called non-
interest expense. This is a catch-all for any expense that is unrelated to borrowing. It 
includes everything from tables and chairs to wages and bonuses. Let's study all of 
these objects in the context of JP Morgan Chase.  
 

Banking and Financial Institutions 
Professor Rustom Irani 
84 
As we've seen before, JP Morgan's business can be broken down into two big parts. 
First is the traditional bank that does the lending. This contains the retail banking arm as 
well as the commercial lending arm within the wholesale business. This is where our net 
interest income is coming from. Second, we're going to see non-interest income. 
Remember, that's fee income. It's mostly coming from the investment banking arm. This 
is mainly the underwriting business, market making, and asset management.  
 
Here is the interest income and interest expense for JP Morgan. We have interest 

Banking and Financial Institutions 
Professor Rustom Irani 
85 
income from the loan portfolio, from investment securities held in the banking book and 
trading portfolio, interest on loans made to other financial institutions. Add that all up 
and we arrive at the total interest income for the bank which was about $65 billion in 
2020. Interest expense is paid on deposits. It is also paid on other borrowings, these are 
both short-term and long-term debt. This will include coupon payments on long-term 
bonds that JP Morgan issues. Sum across all these items and we have our interest 
expense. Interest income, interest expense. The difference between the two is our net 
interest income about $55 billion in 2020. This is the profitability of JP Morgan's lending 
business.  
  
 
In order to go from net interest income to overall profitability, we need to account for 
fees. These are the fees here. They are listed under the banks non-interest income, 
investment banking fees, profits and trading, fees charged and deposit accounts and 
mortgages. These could be overdraft fees or penalties for late payments, credit card 
fees, asset management fees. It's a long list, but we can take a closer look at some of 
the bigger items. They all come from the wholesale business.  
 

Banking and Financial Institutions 
Professor Rustom Irani 
86 
 
First, investment banking fees, M&A advisory, equity underwriting, bond and syndicated 
loan underwriting. JP Morgan earned around nine billion dollars in fees from this 
business line in 2020.  
 
 
Prop trading, these are also called principal transactions. This is when JP Morgan's 
traders take speculative positions in financial markets to make profits on its own 
account. So this is not on behalf of its customers. This generated a whopping $18 
billions of profits in 2020.  

Banking and Financial Institutions 
Professor Rustom Irani 
87 
 
 
Then we have fees from asset management and brokerage services. This is when JP 
Morgan is helping its customers invest in financial markets. The bank earns asset 
management fees from managing portfolios. It also earns brokerage commission fees 
from helping with customer trades. This business line also generated $18 billion in 
change. Adding up those fees gives us our non-interest income of $64 billion.  
 
 

Banking and Financial Institutions 
Professor Rustom Irani 
88 
For a bank as large and diversified as JP Morgan, this amount is actually bigger than 
the $54 billions of profit generated by the lending business. Our last block of items gives 
us the non-interest expense. This includes salaries and bonuses, definitely the biggest 
item, rent, technology, as well as marketing and other smaller items. The bank also has 
to pay taxes. The net income of the bank takes the net interest income plus the non-
interest income and subtracts these non-interest expense items. This is the bottom line 
of the bank. In 2020, it was a healthy $30 billion. JP Morgan is a very large and modern 
bank that is diversified across multiple business lines. In 2020 at least, it had a large 
amount of fee income, so large in fact that its non-interest income was actually bigger 
than the net interest income generated by its lending business. Is JP Morgan a special 
case? Well, yes and no. Yes, it is the largest bank in the U.S. and more diversified than 
the average bank, and no because many other banks rely on fee income to support 
their business as well. The shift towards a fee business has been ongoing since the 
1980s when the 3-6-3 model of banking came under intense pressure.  
 
 
Here we can see the breakdown of net interest income and fee income for U.S. banks in 
recent times. For the average bank, about 1/3 of bank revenue comes from fees.  
 

Banking and Financial Institutions 
Professor Rustom Irani 
89 
 
OK, let's wrap up. In this session, we covered the income statement. We saw how a 
modern bank generates profits from its lending business and also from fees. In the 21st 
century, banks are less reliant on interest income. In an environment with persistently 
low interest rates and new sources of competition in the loan market, focusing on fees 
makes a lot of sense. It is a form of diversification that allows banks to supplement lost 
interest income. 
 
