Banking and Financial Institutions 
Professor Rustom Manouchehri Irani 
 1 
Module 4: Regulation 
Table of Contents 
Module 4: Regulation ............................................................................................................. 1 
Lesson 4 Regulation ......................................................................................................................... 2 
Lesson 4-0: Overview ........................................................................................................................................... 2 
Lesson 4-1: Understanding Bank Regulation ..................................................................................... 3 
Lesson 4-1.1: Goals of Financial Regulation ......................................................................................................... 3 
Lesson 4-1.2: The Government Safety Net ........................................................................................................ 12 
Lesson 4-1.3: Case Study: Interventions in 2007-2009 ...................................................................................... 20 
Lesson 4-2: Regulation and Supervision in Practice ......................................................................... 24 
Lesson 4-2.1: Bank Regulation ........................................................................................................................... 24 
Lesson 4-2.2: The Supervisory Process .............................................................................................................. 31 
Lesson 4-2.3: Stress Testing ............................................................................................................................... 37 
Lesson 4-3:21st Century Challenges for Regulators ......................................................................... 44 
Lesson 4-3.1: Too Big to Fail .............................................................................................................................. 44 
Lesson 4-3.2: Defining Shadow Banking ............................................................................................................ 56 
Lesson 4-3.3: Case Study: Money Market Mutual Funds .................................................................................. 61 
 
 
 

Banking and Financial Institutions 
Professor Rustom Manouchehri Irani 
 2 
Lesson 4 Regulation 
Lesson 4-0: Overview 
 
 
Hello, everyone. And welcome to module four of Financial Institutions. This module is called 
Regulation. This time we're going to study why the government regulates banks and what this 
regulation looks like in practice. We will begin with an examination of the goals of financial 
regulation. What does the government hope to achieve? Why does the financial system 
sometimes fail to deliver, and what can be done about it? Next, we will describe the process of 
bank regulation and supervision. We will see how the government regulates in practice. And 
then in our final step, we will examine some of the major challenges that bank regulators face in 
the 21st century. By the end of this module, you should understand why modern banks are 
regulated, what this regulatory process looks like, and how it is being reshaped to deal with 
emerging challenges. 
 
 

Banking and Financial Institutions 
Professor Rustom Manouchehri Irani 
 3 
Lesson 4-1: Understanding Bank Regulation 
Lesson 4-1.1: Goals of Financial Regulation 
Why do governments regulate private markets? Why is there a need to regulate financial firms? 
Why banks and what are the trade-offs involved with government intervention? These are the 
questions that we hope to address in this session. We will first consider regulation very broadly 
and then we will get specific about bank regulation. We will describe what makes banks unique 
and how regulations have been designed specifically to address problems at banks.  
 

Banking and Financial Institutions 
Professor Rustom Manouchehri Irani 
 4 
 
Let's start from a high level. Regulation is when the government intervenes in otherwise private 
or free markets. The regulation will apply some constraints to market participants. These 
constraints will influence decision-making and therefore market equilibrium. Why are we doing 
this? Well, the goal of intervention is to correct some market failure and to get us to a better 
outcome for society. Usually there is some negative externality or spillover that market 
participants ignore since it doesn't affect them. The government steps in and incentivizes 
market participants to account for the spillover in their decision-making. Environmental 
regulation is the classic example.  
 

Banking and Financial Institutions 
Professor Rustom Manouchehri Irani 
 5 
 
Here we have a factory that pollutes. There is smoke and chemical byproducts that run off into 
the river. People breathe in the pollution. If the fish in the river die off, then the fishing industry is 
negatively impacted. In this case, why do we need regulation? Well, the owner of the factory 
might not account for these downstream problems. The privately optimal amount of production 
and therefore pollution might be too large. The solution is environmental regulation. These 
regulations are designed to ensure that the factory owner accounts for the negative externalities 
from his production.  
 
 

Banking and Financial Institutions 
Professor Rustom Manouchehri Irani 
 6 
We care about banks, so naturally we should be asking, what are the externalities that exist at 
banks. Let's address that question. Banks at value in society through the financial services that 
they offer. Savers and borrowers benefit in a number of ways that we've discussed in previous 
sessions. Generally speaking, regulators worry about bank failure. When individual banks or 
clusters of banks fail, then this can be very bad news. Bad news for local communities that need 
financial services, businesses can lose access to credit, bank failures can destroy household 
savings. If household savings are government insured, something we'll discuss in a moment, 
then bank failures can also be costly for taxpayers. Banks are highly interconnected. If one bank 
fails, then this could have knock-on effects for other banks. These are negative externalities. 
Shareholders and bank managers, they don't like failure, however an individual bank is unlikely 
to account for these knock-on effects when they make their funding and their investment 
decisions. From a societal standpoint, risk-taking is excessive.  
 
 
This is the former headquarters of Lehman Brothers in Time Square, New York. Lehman is a 
clear example of how the risk-taking at one bank can spill over to other financial institutions and 
the broader economy. When an individual failure propagates throughout the financial system, 
this can lead to clusters of failures. These are sometimes called systemic failures. What causes 
systemic failures is an interesting question that we'll come to at another time. Regardless of the 
cause in the event of its failure, Lehman does not bear any of the costs associated with 
systemic failures. These are negative externalities due to failure and this creates a role for 
government intervention. There are two classes of financial regulation that exists to solve these 
externalities. Micro-prudential regulation aims to reduce the risk of an individual bank failure. For 
example, this can put limits on a bank's risk-taking. If the bank does not fail, then we're all fine. 
Macro-prudential regulation instead aims to reduce systemic failures. These regulations target 
the pollution that spills over from our failing bank to other institutions. For example, if large 
failures are very costly to society, then we should impose stricter regulations on bigger banks.  

Banking and Financial Institutions 
Professor Rustom Manouchehri Irani 
 7 
 
Preventing bank failures and promoting financial stability is not the whole picture. Regulators 
have other desired outcomes. The belief is that some of these outcomes would not be achieved 
absent government intervention. A major component of bank regulation is about customer 
protection. The government should protect small investors and borrowers. Small uninformed 
depositors shouldn't lose their life savings if a bank fails. We as a society believe that is unfair. 
Borrowers who are often less sophisticated than bankers should not be ripped off when they 
use financial services. We have all worried about credit card fees or ATM charges at one time or 
another. Red lining is a notorious example of a socially undesirable behavior by banks. The 
background here is severe discrimination in U.S. bank lending on the basis of income, gender 
and race. This means no loans at all or lending on oppressive contract terms.  
 

Banking and Financial Institutions 
Professor Rustom Manouchehri Irani 
 8 
 
Here is a map from a lender in Philadelphia circa 1937. This was called a residential security 
map. It classified entire neighborhoods as too risky. This sometimes lead to the denial of credit 
for any resident in those neighborhoods. It has been shown that race was an important factor 
that determined whether a neighborhood was red or whether it was green. So you could be a 
great borrower just living on the wrong side of the red line and you would not be allowed to 
borrow. That's clearly unfair. To prevent this type of discrimination in lending, numerous 
government regulations have been put in place to ensure that banks serve all members of their 
communities.  
 

Banking and Financial Institutions 
Professor Rustom Manouchehri Irani 
 9 
Having a safe and fair banking system sounds great but there have to be trade-offs. After all, we 
do not regulate the risk-taking of auto manufacturers even though we understand that there may 
be severe supply chain disruptions if one of them goes out of business. Let's be specific about 
the costs of bank regulation. Inefficiency. Regulations apply constraints to banks. These 
constraints can make banks less profitable. Trading generates profits, banning trading lowers 
profits. Regulations nearly always have unintended consequences. When regulators encourage 
banks to grant mortgages in underserved communities, this might have the unintended effect of 
driving up rents. These neighborhoods might become unaffordable for some households. Then 
we have moral hazard. By not punishing excessive risk-taking with failure the government 
creates a perverse incentive for banks to take on risk. Heads I win, tails you lose. Banks get the 
benefits when the economy is doing well. Then the government assumes the costs when the 
financial system collapses. The Troubled Asset Relief Program or TARP is an example of a 
bank bailout.  
 

Banking and Financial Institutions 
Professor Rustom Manouchehri Irani 
 10 
 
Some of the largest U.S. banks had made bad investments. In 2008 these troubled assets were 
purchased by the government. These banks may have failed without government support, 
without taxpayer support. Many economists and commentators pointed out that these bailouts 
encourage risk-taking. Heads, the risky asset pays off. Tails, the risky asset goes to the 
government.  
 
 
Let's sum up. Negative externalities create a role for government intervention. Spillovers from 
bank failures create a role for bank regulation. These regulations can benefit society but they do 

Banking and Financial Institutions 
Professor Rustom Manouchehri Irani 
 11 
not come for free. Government intervention can make banks less efficient or bring about bad 
incentives. Whether regulation makes sense is ultimately a public policy question. Policymakers 
should weigh the benefits against the costs and make a decision. 
 
 

Banking and Financial Institutions 
Professor Rustom Manouchehri Irani 
 12 
Lesson 4-1.2: The Government Safety Net 
 
Banking panics can be very disruptive for the financial system and the broader economy. To 
safeguard the financial system against panics governments around the world have created two 
institutions; deposit insurance and the lender of last resort. These two institutions are often 
called the government safety nets. 
 
In this session, we are going to discuss where banking panics come from and how the 

Banking and Financial Institutions 
Professor Rustom Manouchehri Irani 
 13 
government steps in when panics occur. We will also examine how government interventions 
played out during the 2007-2009 financial crisis. Let's start with the question of why banks are 
fragile. We know that banks borrow short and lend long, we know that most bank assets are 
information sensitive difficult to sell loans. These are illiquid assets. On the other hand, banks 
provide liquidity to depositors. Depositors can withdraw their funds on demand. If you want to 
empty out your checking account today, you can walk into your bank and you can ask for your 
cash and the teller working behind the counter will have to meet your request.  
 
 
This liquidity mismatch between the assets and the liabilities is what makes banks fragile. At 
short notice banks can have cash shortfalls that push them into insolvency. In a bank run, 
deposits and debts are quickly withdrawn. Usually this happens when liability holders worry that 
their bank has made bad investments. Banks only have so much cash and liquid securities on 
hand. Banks can try to liquidate their loan portfolio. But these illiquid assets might be sold at a 
loss at fire sale prices. Even realizing those losses might take some time to happen, so 
anticipating this outcome banks usually close their doors. This is why we see the old pictures of 
depositors lining up outside the bank. When a bank fails this is bad news for savers and 
borrowers. Savers may lose their deposits or access to the payment system; borrowers lose 
access to financial services. The valuable information that loan officers have gathered may also 
vanish. To minimize these social costs governments work with individual banks to reduce the 
chances of failure. 
 

Banking and Financial Institutions 
Professor Rustom Manouchehri Irani 
 14 
 
However, this is not the government's main concern. The government is worried that the initial 
shock would spread through the financial system, the government is concerned about 
contagion. When depositors and creditors become worried about the health of the financial 
system as a whole, then withdrawals can happen across the board. This is called a panic. What 
are the sources of contagion? Why does this initial shock turn into a panic? The usual thinking is 
that there are two main sources of contagion. The first is about information asymmetry between 
depositors and bank managers. I'm a depositor. There is a rumor that my bank has made some 
bad investments and might fail. True or not, I run to my bank and I withdraw my funds before the 
bank closes its doors. Along the way I bump into you, your checking account is with another 
bank but now you begin to worry. What if there is even a small chance that your bank has also 
made bad investments? It is virtually costless for you to pull your funds out so why wouldn't you 
do it. So long as depositors are uninformed, rumors can spread from bad banks to good banks. 
False rumors can even bring down healthy banks. The second source is more direct. In the 21st 
century, banks are highly interconnected. If a money center bank fails then other banks might 
lose access to wholesale funding. Some banks sell large amounts of insurance or derivatives. If 
a bank selling these contracts fails, then the entity on the other side of the transaction might 
lose out. This is called counter-party risk. 
 

Banking and Financial Institutions 
Professor Rustom Manouchehri Irani 
 15 
 
Regardless of how the initial shock spreads, financial panics can be very costly for our society. 
Clusters of healthy banks can fail. If borrowers cannot access credit, then business investment, 
household spending, and overall economic activity may worsen. When the economy does 
poorly more loans will default making things even worse. This negative feedback loop between 
finance and economic activity can lead to deep and long-lasting recessions. We want unhealthy 
banks to fail but we do not want banking panics. This is where the government steps in and 
creates a safety net. This safety net involves two institutions: deposit insurance and the lender 
of last resorts. Together these institutions form a two-pronged attack against banking panics. 
Let's explain who these institutions are and how they work.  
 

Banking and Financial Institutions 
Professor Rustom Manouchehri Irani 
 16 
 
Let's start with deposit insurance. In most countries, there is a deposit insurance program. In the 
U.S. we have had the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation or FDIC since 1933. Banks pay 
for deposit insurance. If a bank fails then the retail depositors at that bank. That's us. We do not 
lose any money. The bank might be gone but the customers get their money back. There is an 
insurance limit. As of 2020, that limit was $250,000. That is more than enough coverage for 
regular customers like you and me. The FDIC will resolve the failed bank. There is no 
bankruptcy court for banks. Instead, the FDIC takes care of it. Usually, this means that the failed 
bank will be auctioned off to another healthy bank in the community. Your checking account will 
sometimes just be transferred to this healthy bank.  
 

Banking and Financial Institutions 
Professor Rustom Manouchehri Irani 
 17 
 
Nowadays, this is a quick and easy process. Here is our failed bank. The depositors get paid off 
in full by the FDIC. They bear no losses, and the FDIC takes the assets and auctions them off 
later. 
 
 
Deposit insurance prevents bank runs. I'm a depositor. I hear a rumor about my bank making 
some bad investment. Why should I care about the rumor? In the worst-case scenario, I'm going 
to get my money back from the FDIC. This might be mildly inconvenient but that's probably 

Banking and Financial Institutions 
Professor Rustom Manouchehri Irani 
 18 
better than leaving the office, running to the bank, pulling my funds, and putting them 
somewhere else. 
 
 
We have all heard of central banks. In the U.S., we have the Federal Reserve System. This has 
been around for over 100 years. One of the key functions of the Fed is to act as the lender of 
last resort. You might not have heard of that before. This involves the Fed giving cash loans to 
solvent banks.  
 
 

Banking and Financial Institutions 
Professor Rustom Manouchehri Irani 
 19 
These are healthy banks experiencing runs. For whatever reason, liability holders are 
withdrawing funds. Rather than selling loans in the open market, which we know is a bad idea, 
the bank can turn to the Fed. Provided these loans are high-quality, the Fed would take them as 
collateral in exchange for a short-term cash loan. The bank takes this cash and can stand ready 
to meet the demands of its depositors. Once depositors realize that they will get their money 
back, they have no incentive to run. At that point, the bank can pay the Fed back on its loan.  
 
 
The lender of last resort provides cash loans to healthy banks. This stops bank runs that are in 
progress. The FDIC reduces incentives to run in the first place. It is a before-the-fact device. 
The Fed stops runs once they emerge. It is an after-the-fact device. 
 

Banking and Financial Institutions 
Professor Rustom Manouchehri Irani 
 20 
Lesson 4-1.3: Case Study: Interventions in 2007-2009 
 
Let's see how the government safety net operated during the financial crisis of 2007- 2009. This 
is a very important case study. What happened before 2007? The short version is that house 
prices peaked across the U.S. in the summer of 2006. Then they fell rapidly. As they began to 
crash, fault lines in the financial system began to emerge.  
 
This chart shows a common measure of financial sector stress called the TED spread. This is 

Banking and Financial Institutions 
Professor Rustom Manouchehri Irani 
 21 
the difference between the interbank rate. That's the required rate of return from lending to a 
bank and the Treasury bill rate, which is the rate of return from lending to the U.S. government. 
In normal times, there's very little difference. And then in bad times, a wider spread emerges. 
During these bad times investors view the financial system as a riskier investment. The first 
major event of the financial crisis happened in August 2007. A large French bank called BNP 
Paribas halted withdrawals from three of its investment fund subsidiaries. These investment 
funds were heavily invested in U.S. mortgages. After BNP, investors began to worry about 
which financial institutions were exposed to U.S. mortgages. This was a period of increasing 
stress. Fast forward several months to March 2008, Bear Stearns, a large and famous U.S. 
investment bank, experienced a run on its wholesale funding. The Fed had to arrange an 
emergency rescue by JPMorgan Chase. The stress was escalating. The collapse of Lehman 
Brothers in September 2008 sparked a broader panic. Measures of financial stress spiked up to 
levels never seen before. Credit markets froze, the stock market plummeted and the spread to 
the broader economy was becoming evident. The government intervened to stop the financial 
panic and limit the economic fallout. I am going to highlight two aspects of the intervention. The 
U.S. policy response was much broader, but I'm just going to focus on the safety net for the 
financial system. 
 
 
First, we had the expansion of deposit insurance. On October 8th 2008 less than one month 
after Lehman collapsed, the deposit insurance limit was increased from $100,000 to $250,000. 
The goal of this intervention was to prevent future runs. 
 

Banking and Financial Institutions 
Professor Rustom Manouchehri Irani 
 22 
 
Second, the lender of last resort provided temporary cash loans. The Federal Reserve caused 
them liquidity facilities. There were several facilities opened up to cater to different borrower 
types. They were up and running in early 2008 but they greatly expanded during the panic. They 
all serve the same purpose to stop runs that were in progress. Later on once things have 
calmed down, the Fed gets paid back. 
 
 
Let's wrap up, banks are prone to large cash shortfalls. This is why they are fragile. Banking 
panics are bad news. An initial shock to one bank can spread by contagion to many others. 

Banking and Financial Institutions 
Professor Rustom Manouchehri Irani 
 23 
Even healthy banks can be brought down during a panic. This creates a role for government 
intervention. We saw how deposit insurance and the lender of last resort deal with bank grants. 
What's the catch? Well, having a robust government safety net cushions bank managers 
against failure. This can create moral hazard the same way that an insured car driver might 
worry a little less about a small crash. Bank managers may be willing to accept greater risks. 
Going forward we will see how bank regulation and supervision is designed to tackle this 
problem. 
 
 

Banking and Financial Institutions 
Professor Rustom Manouchehri Irani 
 24 
Lesson 4-2: Regulation and Supervision in Practice 
Lesson 4-2.1: Bank Regulation 
 
Severe disruptions in the financial system can be very costly for society. As a result banks are 
some of the most heavily regulated firms. 
 
In this session we will describe how government regulation of banks works. We will see how 

Banking and Financial Institutions 
Professor Rustom Manouchehri Irani 
 25 
regulators apply constraints on banks, what products they can sell, where they can sell those 
products, and so on. We will also see examples of what happens when banks break the rules. 
The Basel Accord provides an important case study. We will see how it provides a global 
standard on the loss bearing capacity of banks.  
 
 
Our discussion will focus on bank regulation but I first want to draw the distinction between bank 
regulation and bank supervision. They are closely connected but we are going to consider them 
separately regulation now, supervision at another time. When governments regulate banks they 
establish a set of specific rules that banks must follow. These rules are usually written under the 
authority of some law passed by the government. Congress passes the Glass-Steagall Act, this 
calls for the separation of commercial and investment banking and then the regulator 
implements the rule. Supervision involves continuous oversight of the banking system. If banks 
break the rules, then they are punished. These are called enforcement actions. Supervision 
often has a much narrower focus on the safety and soundness of individual banks. The 
government inspects banks financial reports, conducts on-site examinations and annual stress 
testing. You might have read about stress testing in the newspaper this has only been around 
for a decade or so. We are focusing on regulation. What are the most important roles that banks 
must face? 
 

Banking and Financial Institutions 
Professor Rustom Manouchehri Irani 
 26 
 
What is regulated? There are restrictions on competition what banks can do once they enter the 
market both in terms of their investments and their funding and there are disclosure 
requirements. Let's unpack how these regulations work. First, we have competition in order to 
open a bank you must get approval from a federal or state regulator. Bank mergers require 
government approval. Until recently the geography of banking where banks could branch was 
restricted. When it comes to industry exit there is no bankruptcy process the FDIC resolves 
distressed banks. Too much competition may induce banks to gamble for survival. Too little 
competition makes the government worry about customer exploitation. Hence, we have these 
rules. Second, we have activities and investments in the past deposit-taking commercial banks 
could not do securities underwriting. Nowadays there are limits on proprietary trading. In terms 
of their financial assets banks cannot hold stocks. They are too risky. There are also restrictions 
on junk bond holdings. These regulations directly target the risk-taking of banks. There are 
restrictions on the funding side of the balance sheet as well. Banks face caps on leverage. 
These are expressed as minimum requirements on equity funding, which we will discuss as a 
case study in a moment. The use of wholesale funding is also closely watched. Having stable 
funding that can cushion banks against losses will help to reduce the risk of failure. Finally, we 
have disclosure requirements. Banks must tell their customers how much a credit card is going 
to cost them. Banks must publicly disclose their financials in a standard format and on a regular 
basis, this allows both regulators and financial markets to discipline banks that take on too much 
risk.  
 

Banking and Financial Institutions 
Professor Rustom Manouchehri Irani 
 27 
 
Who regulates? In the U.S. banks are regulated and supervised by a group of nationwide and 
local agencies. All banks have deposit insurance so the FDIC the Federal Deposit Insurance 
Corporation is top of the list. Then we have the Federal Reserve System, the Office of the 
Comptroller of the Currency, which is a sub-agency of the U.S. Treasury Department. Then 
many smaller banks are regulated at the state level. The US is fairly unique in terms of its 
number of regulators other countries have just one bank regulator, usually housed within the 
central bank. Let's talk about capital requirements in more detail.  
 
 

Banking and Financial Institutions 
Professor Rustom Manouchehri Irani 
 28 
Let's do this in the context of the Basel Accord. You can think of this as a global minimum tax on 
bank risk-taking. The historical setting is interesting. It is the 1980s banking is becoming more 
and more global so a bank based in the Republic of Ireland could land in the U.S.. However, if 
the Irish bank was subject to looser regulation than the U.S. bank then this might be a problem. 
The U.S. bank would be at a competitive disadvantage. To keep their own banks competitive 
U.S. regulators might face pressure to lower their own regulatory standards. There could be a 
race to the bottom in regulation.  
 
 
The Basel Accord was the solution. In 1988 global banking regulators met in Basel Switzerland. 
These regulators develop new rules to promote a level playing field for all banks in all countries. 
The Basel Accord focused on the loss-bearing capacity of banks. It encouraged banks to use 
equity capital to fund their investments, more capital means a greater caution against potential 
losses and hence a safer global banking system.  
 

Banking and Financial Institutions 
Professor Rustom Manouchehri Irani 
 29 
 
Specifically, the agreement focused on minimum capital requirements.  Roughly speaking, 
banks must finance each dollar of assets with at least $0.08 of equity. I say roughly because the 
rules accounted for the riskiness of a bank's investments. If a bank only invested in super safe 
AAA-rated government bonds then it would need a smaller equity cushion. The capital 
requirements are risk-based. 
 
 
Here we can see the capital ratios for the largest U.S. banks, JP Morgan, Bank of America, and 
so on. This is data from 2017. These are not simple capital ratios that would be E over A. They 

Banking and Financial Institutions 
Professor Rustom Manouchehri Irani 
 30 
are risk-adjusted capital ratios so E over something called risk-weighted assets. The actual 
process of accounting for risk is complex and has changed over the years. We've gone from 
Basel 1 in 1988 to Basel 3 in 2010. However, the basic idea is the same. Per dollar of risky 
investments all banks need at least X sense of equity. In 2017 the minimum was six cents. All of 
these large banks comfortably met their minimum capital requirements. This is possibly why 
they were so well positioned when COVID hit in 2020.  
 
 
Let's wrap up. This time we were more specific about bank regulation. Regulation applies 
constraints. It bans certain risky activities. It encourages banks to do things that they might 
otherwise overlook. We discussed the Basel Accord as a case study. The Basel Accord set 
minimum capital requirements. This is a global standard that ensures a level playing field. The 
initial agreement came in 1988 and the most recent iteration Basel 3 was announced in 2010. 
 
 

Banking and Financial Institutions 
Professor Rustom Manouchehri Irani 
 31 
Lesson 4-2.2: The Supervisory Process 
 
With bank regulation the government establishes a set of rules. These rules are designed to 
reduce the risk of bank failure or give protection to investors or customers. Supervision is where 
the rubber hits the road. Supervisors make sure that the rules are being followed. If you break 
the rules there have to be consequences. Then there are exams and stress tests. This allows 
supervisors to monitor the safety and soundness of our banks.  
 
In this session we will run through how the supervisory process works. The first question is, who 

Banking and Financial Institutions 
Professor Rustom Manouchehri Irani 
 32 
does the supervision? This is not a trick question. It is the same set of institutions that writes the 
rules, so the FDIC, the Fed, the OCC and the state authorities will be responsible for 
supervising banks. These institutions implement the rules. 
 
 
What happens when banks break them? In this case regulators have the authority to demand 
certain actions, and then penalize noncompliance. Usually the regulator will ask a bank to fix a 
deficient procedure or accomplish something like raise equity. If the bank fails to comply then 
there is a penalty this can involve banning certain individuals from banking, banning certain 
M&A activities, banning dividend payouts or even fines.  
 

Banking and Financial Institutions 
Professor Rustom Manouchehri Irani 
 33 
 
Here is an example of an action taken by the Fed. This is a press release from 2013. It 
concerns the famous London Whale case. In this case a trader made enormous losses, on a 
position that was not carefully monitored by the bank. Here we have the Fed identifying 
deficiencies in risk management at the bank, asking the bank to take prompt actions to correct 
these deficiencies and levying a $200 million fine along the way. Add that to the fines charged 
by UK banking regulators and we arrive at about a $1 billion fine. This punishment was not just 
for the sake of it. The London Whale lost $6 billion and put the bank at risk. If JP Morgan had 
the right procedures in place, then perhaps this could have been avoided.  
 

Banking and Financial Institutions 
Professor Rustom Manouchehri Irani 
 34 
 
Here we have the fines from 2008 until 2015. Fines by bank and fines by the type of infraction. 
Here's our London Whale down here. By far the biggest fines relate to miss sold U.S. 
mortgages and related securities. We can see that these fines add up, if a bank breaks the rules 
then there will be consequences. The hope is that this punishment will encourage banks to 
comply with the rules, and adopt suitable risk management practices. There was a bit of a jump 
there from writing rules to enforcement actions. In-between these two steps there is an 
oversight process. T his is when supervisors take a closer look at the operational side of a bank.  
 
 

Banking and Financial Institutions 
Professor Rustom Manouchehri Irani 
 35 
Formal bank examinations are a key part of this process. All banks have to do them. They have 
an offsite components. Banks must file quarterly financial reports with regulators. Supervisors 
analyze these financial reports to find banks that have potential weaknesses. Exams also have 
an onsite component. This involves an examiner visiting the bank at least once a year. 
Sometimes examiners show up unannounced, or in the case of mega banks examiners are 
onsite all year round but in every case examiners will do a deep dive into the banks business 
and to understand its condition and its performance.  
 
 
The outcome of the examination process is something called a CAMELS score. This score will 
determine whether the bank passes or fails the exam. Banks are evaluated along six critical 
dimensions. Capital adequacy, this is the banks loss bearing capacity. Asset quality, are assets 
defaulting or in good shape? Management, is this a well-run bank that is in compliance with the 
law and regulations? Earnings, are the bank's investments delivering income? Liquidity, what 
are the sources of liquidity risk at the bank, does the bank have sufficient cash on hand and 
sensitivity to market risk? The bank receives a score for each of these criteria. An overall score 
is given, if the bank fails the test then it ends up on the problem bank list. This is the naughty list 
for banks. Problem banks are not publicly named and shamed, but regulators do privately 
inform banks that they have failed the test. These banks will be subject to restrictions until they 
address the regulators specific concerns.  
 

Banking and Financial Institutions 
Professor Rustom Manouchehri Irani 
 36 
 
Here is the problem bank list from 2008-2021. It shows the number of problem banks and their 
total assets under management. This is highly cyclical. When there is a recession, deficiencies 
become exposed. 
 
 

Banking and Financial Institutions 
Professor Rustom Manouchehri Irani 
 37 
Lesson 4-2.3: Stress Testing 
 
Let's now move on to stress testing. This is a relatively new addition to the supervisory process. 
It emerged in the aftermath of the 2007-2009 crisis, and has proven popular since.  
 
 
The goal of stress testing is to force banks to think about large potential losses. The goal is to 
ensure that banks have enough capital to survive a period of severe economic and financial 
distress. It tests their resilience in a forward-looking manner. How does this work? Well, there 

Banking and Financial Institutions 
Professor Rustom Manouchehri Irani 
 38 
are several steps in the process. First, banks are handed some economic scenarios for the 
coming years. There is a baseline scenario. Here, GDP, unemployment, house prices, and so 
on continue on trend. Then there are adverse and severely adverse scenarios. Under these 
worst-case scenarios, the economy collapses. Banks will then project losses under each of 
these scenarios, and based on the projections, banks will submit a plan of action for capital. 
This means a plan for their loss bearing capacity. Would earnings be retained within the bank or 
paid out as dividends? How much additional stock should the bank issue to weather the storm? 
This plan will be submitted to the regulator for review. This is usually the Fed who will form its 
own projections of the banks performance based on its proposed plan. Finally, the results of the 
stress tests are disclosed to the public. Publicly naming and shaming banks has the potential to 
surprise financial markets, so this is an embarrassing event that banks would like to avoid. The 
Supervisory Capital Assessment Program or SCAP was the first stress test administered in the 
U.S.  
 
 
It was conducted during a financial crisis in early 2009 to evaluate the missing capital in the 
banking system.  
 

Banking and Financial Institutions 
Professor Rustom Manouchehri Irani 
 39 
 
It answered the question, how much more loss bearing capacity does each bank need to 
survive? This was a one-off process. It involved 19 of the biggest banks. These banks were 
asked to estimate credit losses for 2009 and 2010 under a baseline and an adverse scenario. 
The adverse scenario was a prolonged economic downturn, unemployment above 10 percent, 
house price is down another 25 percent.  
 
 
Here are the results of that first stress test they released in May 2009. Nineteen banks worst-
case losses, additional capital required to sustain these worst-case losses. Ten out of the 19 

Banking and Financial Institutions 
Professor Rustom Manouchehri Irani 
 40 
firms were found to be capital deficient. The U.S. government gave these firms an ultimatum. 
Either raised the missing capital privately by November 2009 or the U.S. Treasury will provide 
the necessary equity and burn dividends going forward. Within one month, nearly all of these 
firms were able to raise the missing equity. Given the success of the SCAP, regulators have 
made stress tests ongoing for the largest banks. 
 
 
This is called the Comprehensive Capital Adequacy Review or CCAR. It addresses the same 
issue, how much capital is missing in a worst-case scenario.  
 

Banking and Financial Institutions 
Professor Rustom Manouchehri Irani 
 41 
 
They happen once a year. There are three scenarios, banks are expected to forecast losses two 
years ahead. 
 
 
And they continue to provide a capital plan for Fed review and public disclosure. The belief here 
is that financial markets would discipline banks that fail the test.  
 

Banking and Financial Institutions 
Professor Rustom Manouchehri Irani 
 42 
 
Here is the severely adverse scenario for the first CCAR. These scenarios were provided to 
banks. They were actually 28 macroeconomic variables. Here we can see GDP growth, 
unemployment, the stock market, and house prices. The solid lines show the actual path, and 
the dashed lines show the scenarios provided by the Fed. All of them take a turn for the worse 
in this adverse scenario. Banks submit their plans to the Fed, the Fed conducts its review, and 
the results are announced.  
 

Banking and Financial Institutions 
Professor Rustom Manouchehri Irani 
 43 
This chart shows the equity capital ratios under the worst-case scenario. In the 2012 cycle, 
everyone passed except for Ally Bank. They fell below the five percent minimum set by the Fed.  
 
 
Let's wrap up. Supervision is where banking rules and regulations are put into practice. Banks 
are examined on a regular basis. This happens both on and off site and in recent years, the 
largest banks have been subjected to stress tests. If a bank is somehow deficient, then an 
enforcement action may follow. The goal is to have a competitive and well-performing banking 
system that operates within acceptable risk limits. 
 

Banking and Financial Institutions 
Professor Rustom Manouchehri Irani 
 44 
Lesson 4-3:21st Century Challenges for Regulators 
Lesson 4-3.1: Too Big to Fail 
 
We have seen how the government regulates and supervises the banking sector. We want an 
efficient yet safe banking system. In this session, we are going to discuss the role of bank size. 
When a small bank fails, this is bad news for its community. However, when one of the largest 
institutions fails, this can threaten the entire financial system. These largest institutions are often 
called too big to fail. We are going to proceed in three steps. 
 

Banking and Financial Institutions 
Professor Rustom Manouchehri Irani 
 45 
We will first examine the concentration of the U.S. banking system, we will then introduce the 
concept of systemic risk and then finally, we will see how in recent years government regulation 
has tried to address this immense challenge. The U.S. banking system is concentrated. By this, 
we mean that a handful of banks control the bulk of borrowing and lending activity. 
 
 
While there may be thousands and thousands of banks out there, only a few mega banks are 
responsible for the bulk of this activity. JPMorgan, Bank of America, Citigroup, Wells Fargo, 
there are about 10 U.S. mega banks. 

Banking and Financial Institutions 
Professor Rustom Manouchehri Irani 
 46 
 
This chart is based on 2018 data from the FDIC. It shows the assets under management of nine 
or 10 of these megabanks. The megabanks each have greater than $250 billion of assets. 
Collectively, they hold about 50% of all bank assets. There are thousands of community banks 
each with fewer than $1 billion of assets but they collectively hold aroound15% of all bank 
assets. The U.S. banking system has a handful of megabanks and a competitive fringe of small 
banks. Why do we see this industry structure? That's a hard question. There are two 
complementary views. 
 

Banking and Financial Institutions 
Professor Rustom Manouchehri Irani 
 47 
The first says, it is efficient for banks to grow large. Banks should scale up to exploit economies 
of scale, banks should become more complex to exploit economies of scope. Scope economies 
can arise from selling multiple products that share fixed costs. An alternative, slightly darker 
viewpoint is that banks understand that the government will not allow the largest financial 
institutions to fail. If I am a megabank and I am running into trouble, then the government will 
bail me out. The lender of last resort might give me a loan. The government might quickly 
arrange a merger for me. The government might even give me cash in exchange for my equity. 
These are all government subsidies or bailouts. This too big to fail policy encourages banks to 
get bigger in order to capture this subsidy. Bailouts are too big to fail policy in action. 
 
  

Banking and Financial Institutions 
Professor Rustom Manouchehri Irani 
 48 
 
The unusual treatment of continental Illinois Bank as it approached failure gave rise to the term 
too big to fail. In 2008 UK banks including the Royal Bank of Scotland were partially nationalized 
rather than forced into bankruptcy. A huge number of U.S. banks were given cash in exchange 
for equity. This occurred most prominently through the troubled asset relief program or TARP. 
Goldman Sachs and Morgan Stanley were even allowed to convert from investment banks to 
commercial bank holding companies in order to access this and other government backstops. 
Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac, the government sponsored enterprises also received a great deal 
of help from the government. During 2008 even some of the largest insurance companies 
received government assistance.  
 

Banking and Financial Institutions 
Professor Rustom Manouchehri Irani 
 49 
 
When a financial institution fails, there may be spillovers to the financial system and the broader 
economy, systemic risk captures this idea of potential spillovers. In the worst case scenario, the 
flow of payments and credit through the financial system can come to a sudden stop and the 
economy shuts down. Which farms create the most systemic risk? Well, it seems natural that 
larger firms will have larger spillovers when they fail. It is also possible that smaller but more 
complex and interconnected financial firms will matter as well. Why is this? Well, larger and 
more interconnected financial firms are more likely to have linkages with businesses and other 
financial firms. This can be through their traditional borrowing and lending activities, but also 
through financial contracts such as derivatives. How should we think about systemic risk 
regulation? Well, systemic risk is a lot like pollution. An individual bank is not going to account 
for the downstream problems it creates when it fails. In the past, regulators have tried to 
minimize the risk of an individual bank failing. More recently, macroprudential approaches 
instead target these spillovers between financial firms. This resembles a tax on pollution. 
 

Banking and Financial Institutions 
Professor Rustom Manouchehri Irani 
 50 
 
The Financial Stability Oversight Council or FSOC was established in 2010 to achieve this 
ambitious goal of managing systemic risk to prevent financial crises. 
 
 
The FSOC brings together a broad array of financial regulators twice a month. This includes 
leaders of the Treasury, the Federal Reserve, the SEC, the FDIC and the Commodities Futures 
Trading Commission, which regulates derivatives markets. These regulators sit down, they have 
lunch and they take a holistic view of the financial system rather than staying focused on 

Banking and Financial Institutions 
Professor Rustom Manouchehri Irani 
 51 
supervising their individual markets. They collectively think long and hard about the safety of the 
financial system as a whole. 
 
They also have the power to designate any private firm as a systemically important financial 
institution or SIFI. SIFI firms are subject to enhanced oversights. 
 
The SIFI banks are also called GSIBs or globally systemically important banks. This 
classification is done by International bank regulators. These banks are the largest and most 

Banking and Financial Institutions 
Professor Rustom Manouchehri Irani 
 52 
interconnected in the world. The G-SIB banks are tiered into different systemic risk categories. 
JPMorgan is considered the most systemically important. HSBC might not be the biggest bank, 
but it is certainly the most global. 
 
 
In the second bucket, we have mega banks that are viewed as less of a systemic threat. ICBC, 
the Industrial and Commercial Bank of China is by far the largest bank in the world in terms of 
assets, but it is mostly domestic in scope.  
 

Banking and Financial Institutions 
Professor Rustom Manouchehri Irani 
 53 
And with the G-SIB bucket zero, we have the complete list of globally systemically important 
banks. Okay, so the FSOC has now designated a set of institutions as systemically important. 
What next? How should supervision and regulation be designed to target systemic risk? 
 
The U.S. government uses two approaches. First, SIFI are firms are subject to stress testing by 
the Federal Reserve System. As discussed previously, stress testing encourages these firms to 
be forth thinking about potential losses in a financial crisis. And then they should have sufficient 
capital to absorb these losses and survive. This exercise is even more important if one of these 

Banking and Financial Institutions 
Professor Rustom Manouchehri Irani 
 54 
firms is systemically important. The second approach is to tax these institutions, pollution taxes, 
incentivize dirty firms to become clean, systemic risk surcharges, discourage financial firms from 
becoming too big to fail. 
 
Here are the systemic risk capital surcharges for the G-SIB banks. Citigroup, HSBC, JPMorgan 
these banks are considered the most systemically risky on the planet. And they are taxed as 
such. Compared with equivalent non-systemic banks, they must hold an additional two 
percentage points of equity per dollar invested. From a societal standpoint, we want these 
systemic banks to be even more resilient to potential losses. 
 

Banking and Financial Institutions 
Professor Rustom Manouchehri Irani 
 55 
 
Let's wrap up, systemic risk captures the potential spillovers from the failure of one bank to the 
rest of the system. Larger and more interconnected banks present the biggest systemic risks 
and everyone believes that they are too big to fail. Too big to fail presents a major challenge for 
bank regulators. The basic idea of systemic risk regulation is to identify and then tax these large 
and complex financial firms. In the U.S., this is the responsibility of the FSOC. By subjecting the 
largest banks to enhance oversight, the hope is that the system will become safer. 
 
 

Banking and Financial Institutions 
Professor Rustom Manouchehri Irani 
 56 
Lesson 4-3.2: Defining Shadow Banking 
 
Because disruptions within the banking system can be costly for society governments provide a 
safety net and regulate banks. This regulation is burdensome, but our belief is that it allows the 
banking system to run smoothly and efficiently. 
 
 
In this session, we will examine shadow banking. Shadow banks are another set of institutions 
that provide similar financial services as banks. However, shadow banks are subject to less 

Banking and Financial Institutions 
Professor Rustom Manouchehri Irani 
 57 
regulation. This presents an immense challenge for bank regulators, especially when they have 
limited authority to intervene. Our goal is to understand the risks at shadow banks and recent 
attempts at regulation. We will focus on money market mutual funds as a case study. Our 
discussion of the banking system has come a long way. 
 
 
 It might seem odd to bring this up now, but in order to define a shadow bank, we must first 
agree upon a definition of a commercial bank. Under the 1956 Bank Holding Company Act. A 
commercial bank is an institution that accepts demand deposits and makes commercial loans. It 
does both of these activities under the same roof. Over the years, many institutions have 
emerged that provide commercial banking services but are technically not considered banks. 
Some of these institutions fund illiquid assets, like corporate or retail loans, for example, a 
mortgage backed security or MBS. It's a portfolio of mortgages. A corporate loan mutual fund, is 
a portfolio of corporate loans. Other institutions may fund their operations by issuing liabilities 
that resemble demand deposits. A repurchase agreement allows cash-rich firms like pension 
firms to store their cash and recover it at short notice. This serves a similar economic function to 
a bank deposit. Some institutions do both. They issue deposit like liabilities and invest in illiquid 
assets.  
 

Banking and Financial Institutions 
Professor Rustom Manouchehri Irani 
 58 
 
The classic example is a money market mutual fund. This is a mutual fund that funds itself by 
selling fixed value shares. I can put a dollar into a money market account and withdraw it at 
short notice for $1 plus maybe some interest. These shares are marketed as savings accounts 
from a customer standpoint. They serve the same function as bank deposits. On the asset side. 
The money market fund invests in a variety of debt instruments. This is basically what a bank 
does. It issues deposits and invest in illiquid assets. So for this reason, money market funds are 
often called shadow banks. Some hedge funds that rely on short-term debt funding are also 
considered shadow banks. On the other hand, non-banks such as insurance companies are not 
considered shadow banks. While insurance companies do invest in long term illiquid assets, 
they are not funded with liquid liabilities. Why do we see shadow banks? Well, perhaps they are 
specialized financial firms that are more efficient than banks.  
 

Banking and Financial Institutions 
Professor Rustom Manouchehri Irani 
 59 
 
A popular counter argument, however, is that these institutions can provide the same services 
at banks, but avoid the regulation. Hence the name. These institutions lurk in the shadows 
hidden from regulation. So, what's the problem with shadow banking, you might see it already. 
Shadow banks are exposed to liquidity risk. 
 
 
If we allow shadow banks to issue deposits, then won't they be subject to depositor runs? The 
short answer is, yes. This is a problem that was solved for commercial banks over a century 
ago. With the introduction of the government safety net. Shadow banks are fragile because they 

Banking and Financial Institutions 
Professor Rustom Manouchehri Irani 
 60 
do not have access to the government safety net. Shadow deposits are not insured by the 
FDIC. This means that shadow depositors have an incentive to run on the shadow bank, if they 
are worried. Shadow banks cannot borrow from the lender of last resort during a financial crisis. 
This means that if a run is taking place, a healthy shadow bank might run out of cash and fail. 
These institutions face limited government regulation, so during a crisis, they are not supposed 
to be bailed out. However, we shall see that money market funds were bailed out in 2008. 
 
 

Banking and Financial Institutions 
Professor Rustom Manouchehri Irani 
 61 
Lesson 4-3.3: Case Study: Money Market Mutual Funds 
 
Okay, let's consider the important case study of money market funds. Before 2008 money 
market funds offered savings accounts that mimicked FDIC insured deposits. Money market 
funds basically offered bank deposits without deposit insurance or capital requirements. The 
lightly regulated money market fund industries suffered massive withdrawals in September 
2008. Some money market funds had made losing investments in Lehman Brothers and others 
supposedly safe assets.  
 

Banking and Financial Institutions 
Professor Rustom Manouchehri Irani 
 62 
 
When these losses were realized, this sparked an industry wide panic. Here we can see the run. 
Assets under management are normalized at 100% on September 10, 2008. This is about a 
week before Lehman Brothers went under. Assets collapsed by some 30% before stabilizing. 
These assets were sold to come up with the cash to meet withdrawals. This was a panic. About 
10 days out, the withdrawals leveled off. Why did the panic subside? Well, there was a 
government bailout. I will say this one last time. Money market funds are shadow banks. They 
do not issue government insured deposits and they should not be able to borrow from the 
Federal Reserve during a crisis. But in 2008 when push came to shove, they were allowed to do 
so. The entire industry was viewed as too big to fail. On September 19, 2008 the U.S. 
government guaranteed all of the liabilities of money market funds. The investors did not stand 
to lose a single penny.  
 

Banking and Financial Institutions 
Professor Rustom Manouchehri Irani 
 63 
 
Not only that, but the Federal Reserve used its emergency authority to provide cash loans to 
money market funds. Now these mutual funds could easily meet the cash needs of their 
investors. In this chart, we see the dramatic ramping up and winding down of the feds lending 
program to these struggling mutual funds. Overall, these shadow banks received a near 
identical access to the government safety net as insured and regulated commercial banks.  
 
 
How did the US government respond to this unfortunate episode? Enter our systemic risk 
regulator, the Financial Stability Oversight Council. This was the forum for the Treasury, Federal 

Banking and Financial Institutions 
Professor Rustom Manouchehri Irani 
 64 
Reserve and SEC, who regulates the mutual fund industry to find a solution. Our money market 
funds systemically important. Well, yes and no. No individual fund is systemically important, but 
the entire industry appears to be prone to runs. The FSOC pushed the SEC to safeguard 
financial stability. They introduced the floating net asset value rule for large funds that were 
prone to runs. This made the shares of these money market funds less like deposits and more 
like the shares of a mutual fund. These new rules also provided money market funds with tools 
to prevent runs. During a run, the Fund could now charge liquidity fees for withdrawals and even 
freeze redemptions for up to 10 days.  
 
 
Did these new rules help prevent runs in 2020? Well, unfortunately, no. Here we have money 
market fund assets under management now centered on March 9, 2020. This date corresponds 
to the onset of the COVID-19 shock in the United States. Again we see a panic. And then, 10 
days after the initial run, we had the Feds stepping in once again and bailing out the industry 
with cash loans. Why didn't the new rules work? Well, this is still subject to debate. One issue is 
that charging fees for withdrawals can incentivize investors to run preemptively. I can withdraw 
right now, or maybe my funds will be locked up tomorrow. This suggests that it might be 
counterproductive to give money market fund managers the tools to block withdrawals. 
Evidently, U.S. policymakers could not prevent another panic and bailout. 
 

Banking and Financial Institutions 
Professor Rustom Manouchehri Irani 
 65 
 
Let's wrap up. We drew the distinction between commercial banks and shadow banks. Shadow 
banks offer similar financial services as commercial banks but are not regulated in the same 
way. They typically face less government regulation. Shadow banks are not supposed to have 
access to the government safety net. However, as we saw with money market funds, the 
government can have a strong incentive to bail them out. Identifying and regulating shadow 
banks remains an immense challenge for financial regulators going forward. 
 
 
