Central Banks and Monetary Policy 
Professor Ralf Meisenzahl 
 
1 
 
Module 3: Economic Impacts of Monetary Policy 
Table of Contents 
Module 3: Economic Impacts of Monetary Policy .................................................................... 1 
Lesson 3-0.1: Overview ......................................................................................................................................... 2 
Lesson 3-1: The Link Between Inflation and Unemployment ............................................................5 
Lesson 3-1.1. Understanding Economic Growth and Unemployment ................................................................. 5 
Lesson 3-1: The Link Between Inflation and Unemployment .......................................................... 13 
Lesson 3-1.2. Connecting Unemployment and Inflation..................................................................................... 13 
Lesson 3-1: The Link Between Inflation and Unemployment .......................................................... 25 
Lesson 3-1.3. Monetary Policy Rules ................................................................................................................... 25 
Lesson 3-2: Transmission of Monetary Policy ................................................................................ 38 
Lesson 3-2.1. How Do Changes in Monetary Policy Affect the Economy? ......................................................... 38 
Lesson 3-2.2. Monetary Policy Transmission Through Banks ............................................................................. 48 
Lesson 3-2: Transmission of Monetary Policy ................................................................................ 60 
Lesson 3-2.3. Monetary Policy Transmission Through Banks ............................................................................. 60 
Lesson 3-3: Limits of Monetary Policy ........................................................................................... 69 
Lesson 3-3.1. Limits of Monetary Policy: Supply Shocks ..................................................................................... 69 
Lesson 3-3: Limits of Monetary Policy ........................................................................................... 80 
Lesson 3-3.2. Limits of Monetary Policy: Jobless Recoveries and Risk- Taking Incentives ................................. 80 
 

Central Banks and Monetary Policy 
Professor Ralf Meisenzahl 
 
2 
Lesson 3-0 Module 3 Information 
Lesson 3-0.1: Overview  
 
Hello and welcome, I hope you're doing well from wherever it is you're joining us. The 
purpose of the Federal Reserve is to achieve maximum employment and stable prices. 
This is called the Fed's dual mandate. In an ideal world, the economy would have 
minimal inflation, and everybody would have a job, however, this is not always the case. 
Okay, but how do the Fed monetary policy actions affect the economy? This is the goal 
of this module; we will look at connections between monetary policy actions that bring 
about changes in the most important macroeconomic outcomes. We will also discuss 
how these changes happen; we will start with the idea of maximum employment. While 
the dual mandate is stated in terms of jobs, many central banks, including the Federal 
Reserve, talk a lot about economic growth. To explain why we will first study the 
relationship between gross domestic product or GDP and unemployment.  
 

Central Banks and Monetary Policy 
Professor Ralf Meisenzahl 
 
3 
 
We will then see how decreases in the Fed's target interest rate can increase GDP and 
therefore decrease unemployment. As part of this discussion, we will see what the goal 
of maximum employment means in the context of the United States. Next, we will study 
the link between unemployment, wages, and inflation, we will see that there is a tradeoff 
between unemployment and inflation. By easing monetary policy, a central bank can 
lower unemployment at least in the short run, but this may come at the cost of higher 
inflation. This tradeoff between unemployment and inflation is central to decision making 
at the Federal Reserve. We will see how this trade-off is embedded in the monetary 
policy rules such as the celebrated Taylor Rule. These rules dictate exactly how interest 
rates should be set depending on the state of the economy. With this tradeoff between 
inflation and unemployment in mind, we will then study how monetary policy works. That 
is through which channels to changes in the interest rate affect economic growth and 
thereby inflation and unemployment. We start with a high-level overview that shows you 
the effects of monetary policy on the economy as a whole. We then drill down on how 
monetary policy affects credit supply by banks and therefore money supply in the 
economy. The next lesson discusses how monetary policy affects firms and households 
which in turn affects investment and consumption decisions. Both consumption and 
investment are part of the GDP, and these decisions are going to affect unemployment. 
Monetary policy can mitigate harmful boom and bust in the economic cycle by raising 
the interest rates during expansions and reducing the interest rate during contractions. 
This is what Central banks hope to achieve.  
 

Central Banks and Monetary Policy 
Professor Ralf Meisenzahl 
 
4 
 
The last two lessons are case studies that illustrates the limits of monetary policy. We 
will see that monetary policy can do little to offset supply-side shocks such as spikes in 
oil prices. It cannot do much to support employment in industries that are in permanent 
decline due to structural changes in the economic environment. In some, the previous 
module discussed which monetary policy tools are available to central banks and how 
they are affecting the interest rates. In this module, we look at how interest rate changes 
affect the economy, and how this helps the Federal Reserve to choose its dual mandate 
of stable prices and maximum employment.  
 

Central Banks and Monetary Policy 
Professor Ralf Meisenzahl 
 
5 
Lesson 3-1: The Link Between Inflation and Unemployment 
Lesson 3-1.1. Understanding Economic Growth and Unemployment 
  
Hello and welcome to this lecture on economic growth and unemployment. Remember, 
the Federal Reserve uses monetary policy to achieve stable prices and maximum 
employment. But what exactly do we mean by maximum employment? In this class, we 
will examine unemployment. We will introduce some new definitions of unemployment. 
The natural rate of unemployment, full employment, maximum employment. We will 
understand what this terminology means and why it is needed. We will also define gross 
domestic product or GDP. This is a measure of total output for an economy. We will see 
the relationship between the unemployment rate and GDP growth in the data. Finally, 
we will understand why the Federal Reserve does not try to reduce the unemployment 
rate to zero.  
 

Central Banks and Monetary Policy 
Professor Ralf Meisenzahl 
 
6 
 
Let's start with the unemployment data. An individual is unemployed if they do not have 
a job and they are seeking employment. The unemployment rate is the share of the 
labor force that is currently unemployed. In the graph you can see the US 
unemployment rate in the modern era. The shaded areas in the graph indicate 
recessions. You can see that unemployment increases rapidly during a recession. For 
instance, from October 1973 to May 1975, the unemployment rate nearly doubled. It 
increased from 4.6% to 9%, at the same time, unemployment falls rapidly after the end 
of a recession. By March 1976, the unemployment rate had already dropped to 7.6%.  
 

Central Banks and Monetary Policy 
Professor Ralf Meisenzahl 
 
7 
 
Now let's turn to our measure of economic growth. Gross Domestic Product. GDP is the 
total dollar value of all goods and services produced by an economy. Real GDP adjusts 
this measure for inflation. Real GDP in the US has been growing over time. However, 
during recession it falls, this means the economy contracts. Let's look at this in the data.  
 
 
The graph shows quarterly percent changes of growth in real GDP. During recessions, 
the shaded areas real GDP growth is negative. You can see that GDP fell by as much 

Central Banks and Monetary Policy 
Professor Ralf Meisenzahl 
 
8 
as 1% during each quarter of 1974. What is the relationship between unemployment 
and real GDP growth? During recession unemployment goes up and GDP goes down, 
during expansion, the opposite happens, this suggests a negative correlation.  
 
Let's combine the previous two charts to see how this works. Each dot represents a 
quarter. On the x axis, we have the growth in unemployment relative to the prior quarter. 
And on the y axis we have the GDP growth for that same quarter. We can see the 
negative correlation in the data, this correlation is indicated by the downward sloping 
red line. Based on historical US data, the slope of the line is about -2. This empirical fact 
was first stated by the economist Arthur Okun, it is known as Okun's Law. Why do 
monetary policymakers find Okun's Law useful? Because Okun's Law gives some 
guidance about how much unemployment will decline when they cut the interest rate to 
stimulate the economy. Once you have an estimate for how much real GDP is going to 
increase after an interest rate cut, then you also know by how much unemployment is 
going to decline. Understanding the relationship between these macroeconomic 
variables enables the Fed to better target monetary policy. Let's now ask a different 
question.  
 

Central Banks and Monetary Policy 
Professor Ralf Meisenzahl 
 
9 
 
You might be thinking, why can't central banks reduce the unemployment rate to zero? 
The answer is that there is a natural rate of unemployment. This means that even if the 
economy is at peak performance, some workers will still be unemployed. One reason 
for this natural rate of unemployment is that it takes time to find a suitable job. A job that 
is a good fit with your schedules or skill sets. This is true for individuals that recently left 
education, recently lost a job, or those relocating. Other factors creating positive 
unemployment include new technologies that make all skills obsolete and force 
reallocation. Just consider what autonomous driving will mean for truck drivers. Higher 
unemployment benefits may also give unemployed more time to find a better fitting job. 
Let's look again at the time series of the unemployment rate in the US.  
 

Central Banks and Monetary Policy 
Professor Ralf Meisenzahl 
 
10
 
Roughly speaking, we can estimate the natural rate based on unemployment during 
good economic times. Estimates suggest that in the 1950s and 1960s, the natural rate 
of unemployment was 4%. For the period between 1970 and 1983, the natural rate was 
estimated to be 6%, and from 1984 to 2000, the estimate went down to 5.5%. The chart 
also shows large cyclical fluctuation in unemployment. Notably, during recessions, 
unemployment exceeds the natural rate. This is where monetary policy can be effective.  
 

Central Banks and Monetary Policy 
Professor Ralf Meisenzahl 
 
11
 
One last question what is the natural rate of unemployment today? Let's look at 
unemployment in the new millennium. After the 2001 recession, the unemployment rate 
recovered only slowly as compared with the recessions in the second half of the 20th 
century. Similarly, after the 2008 financial crisis, the unemployment rate did not recover 
as quickly as expected. This prompted speculation that the natural rate of 
unemployment had increased. However, by December 2019, close to the end of the 
longest economic expansions in the US the unemployment rate was 3.6%. Likewise, 
after the COVID pandemic, the unemployment rate was historically low. This suggests 
that the natural rate of unemployment may have decreased. Overall, it is hard to say, 
new technologies or changes in the labor market might play a role. However, we need 
more time before we can decide.  
 

Central Banks and Monetary Policy 
Professor Ralf Meisenzahl 
 
12
 
Let's wrap up, we covered two concepts in this session. First, we saw that changes in 
unemployment and real GDP are negatively correlated in the data, this is called Okun's 
law. This relationship guides monetary policy decisions. Second, even when the 
economy is growing at full capacity, unemployment will be greater than zero, this is 
called the natural rate of unemployment.  
 
 

Central Banks and Monetary Policy 
Professor Ralf Meisenzahl 
 
13
Lesson 3-1: The Link Between Inflation and Unemployment 
Lesson 3-1.2. Connecting Unemployment and Inflation 
  
Hello, and welcome to this lecture on the relationship between wages, unemployment 
and inflation. Inflation targeting is central to monetary policy. In this class, we will 
discuss how labor costs or wage inflation, feeds into consumer price inflation. We will 
see how wages and inflation move together. We will then examine the relationship 
between inflation and unemployment. For that, we will introduce the idea of the Phillips 
Curve. This is one of the most famous charts in economics. You will see, how it 
describes the tradeoff between inflation and unemployment. Less inflation usually 
comes at a cost of higher unemployment. Finally, we will understand how changes in 
inflation expectations can shift the Phillips Curve.  
 

Central Banks and Monetary Policy 
Professor Ralf Meisenzahl 
 
14
 
Economists, policymakers, or the press, talk about inflation all the time. They are 
usually referring to consumer price inflation, or CPI. This refers to growth in the price of 
a bundle of consumer goods. You may wonder, what causes consumer prices to go up. 
One answer is input prices. We all realize that fueling a car is more expensive when 
crude oil prices are high. More generally, when input prices rise, the cost of producing 
goods and providing services, goes up too. Put differently, higher producer price 
inflation, can lead to an increase in the CPI. Let's look at some data on this.  
 

Central Banks and Monetary Policy 
Professor Ralf Meisenzahl 
 
15
 
This graph shows consumer price inflation, and producer price inflation since the 1980s. 
We can see that, while the producer price index is more volatile, the two series track 
each other. Higher producer prices, lead to higher consumer goods prices.  
 
 
What is the biggest cost component of most industries? Labor expenses let's add an 
employment cost index to this graph. This employment cost index includes both wages 
and benefits. The series only begins in 2000, so we must restrict the time frame. We 

Central Banks and Monetary Policy 
Professor Ralf Meisenzahl 
 
16
see again that employment costs and consumer price inflation, track each other. This 
suggests that increases in wages lead to consumer price inflation.  
 
 
Let's push this reasoning one step further. When do wages increase most? What 
causes wage inflation? Wages go up usually when employees have the most bargaining 
power. This is when unemployment is low, and there's less competition for jobs. When 
unemployment is high, employers do not have to pay higher wages to attract job 
applicants.  
 

Central Banks and Monetary Policy 
Professor Ralf Meisenzahl 
 
17
 
This relationship was first noted by Arthur Phillips. He plotted unemployment against 
wage growth in the United Kingdom. He found a negative correlation between the two 
outcomes.  
 
 
When unemployment is low, wages tend to go up. When unemployment is high, wages 
tend to shrink. This relationship is often called the Phillips Curve. Nowadays, the term 
Phillips curve, is used to describe the relationship between unemployment and 

Central Banks and Monetary Policy 
Professor Ralf Meisenzahl 
 
18
consumer price inflation. We saw earlier, how CPI and wage growth track each other, 
so this is understandable. Let's examine the Phillips Curve in the United States, in the 
more recent years.  
 
 
Here's the data from the 1960s. As before, we have the unemployment rate on the X 
axis, but now we have consumer price inflation, on the Y axis. We can see the negative 
relationship between inflation and unemployment holds.  
 

Central Banks and Monetary Policy 
Professor Ralf Meisenzahl 
 
19
 
Why should we care? What are the implications for policymakers? This graph suggests 
a clear tradeoff between unemployment and inflation. This means, that any government 
policy that reduces unemployment may increase inflation. This matters for monetary 
policy. Remember, stable prices and maximum employment are the Federal Reserve's 
mandate. These goals are in conflict. Achieving both goals at the same time is a 
balancing act. In practice, we can see key decision makers at the Fed, thinking about 
the Phillips curve.  
 

Central Banks and Monetary Policy 
Professor Ralf Meisenzahl 
 
20
 
For instance, in 2008, the then Vice Chairman of the Board of Governors of the Federal 
Reserve System, Donald Cohn, stated that, an economic model of inflation is an 
indispensable input to monetary policy deliberations. A model in the Phillips curve 
tradition remains at the core of how most academic researchers and policymakers, 
including this one, think about fluctuation in inflation. Indeed, alternative frameworks 
seem to lack solid economic foundations, and empirical support. Are we done? Well, not 
quite.  
 

Central Banks and Monetary Policy 
Professor Ralf Meisenzahl 
 
21
In the 1960s and early 1970s, it was thought that the relationship between 
unemployment and inflation was stable. However, over the next two decades, a different 
pattern emerged. Here's the data for the 1970s and 1980s. Unfortunately, the negative 
correlation seems to have vanished.  
 
 
However, when you squint a little, the usual pattern seems to emerge. It looks like, that 
there is not one, but three relationships. One for the early 1970s, one for the late 1970s, 

Central Banks and Monetary Policy 
Professor Ralf Meisenzahl 
 
22
and one for the early 1980s. It looks like there are three Phillips curves. Weird, right? 
These curves also seem to be shifting outwards over time. An outward shift is not a 
good thing. The further the Phillips curve shifts out, the more unemployment is needed 
to keep inflation in check. For example, let's say, we want to hold inflation at 6%. In 
1973, this would require an unemployment rate of 5%. However, by 1982, 
unemployment would have reached 10% to achieve the same inflation rate. While the 
1970s and 1980s cast out on the overall relationship between inflation and 
unemployment, the data indicates that, at least in the short run, the Phillips curve works. 
We now examined, what determines these short run Phillips curves, in the 1970s and 
1980s.  
 
 
Let's look at consumer price inflation in the United States, between 1960 and 1995. 
Clearly, during the early 1970s, late 1970s, and early 1980s, consumer price inflation 
was higher and increasing as compared with the 1960s. Hence, a plausible explanation 
for the outward shift of the Phillips curve, could be an upward shift in inflation 
expectations, from the early 1970s to the early 1980s. Why do expectations about future 
inflation matter? This is not hard to see. Suppose your employer announces a 5% wage 
increase. This sounds like a great increase. However, what if consumer price inflation is 
currently running at 10%, and is expected to remain at 10% next year? This means, that 
your income adjusted for inflation, your real wage falls by 5%. That's not great news. 
Only real wage increases raise living standards. This suggests that when workers 
expect higher inflation they demand even higher wages. This alters the relationship 
between wages and unemployment. And that has knock on effects for the relationship 
between unemployment and consumer price inflation.  

Central Banks and Monetary Policy 
Professor Ralf Meisenzahl 
 
23
 
 
The increase in inflation expectation explains the outward shift of the short run Phillips 
curves, that we saw in the 1970s and 1980s. It also explains why policymakers keep a 
close eye on inflation expectations. They try to keep inflation expectations well 
anchored.  
 
Let's wrap up. We have covered three big ideas in this session. First, wages and 

Central Banks and Monetary Policy 
Professor Ralf Meisenzahl 
 
24
consumer price inflation, move together. Second, there is a tradeoff between inflation 
and unemployment, modeled in the Phillips curve. Third, changes in inflation 
expectation, can shift the Phillips curve.  
 
 

Central Banks and Monetary Policy 
Professor Ralf Meisenzahl 
 
25
Lesson 3-1: The Link Between Inflation and Unemployment 
Lesson 3-1.3. Monetary Policy Rules  
  
Hello, and welcome to this class on the design of monetary policy rules. Nowadays, 
central banks set the interest rate to achieve their goals. In the Federal Reserve's case, 
they adjust the federal funds rate, but the Fed faces a tradeoff between their goals of 
stable prices and maximum employment. Remember the Phillips Curve? In this session, 
we will discuss how this tradeoff is approached in practice. We will introduce the idea of 
an output gap and an inflation gap. We will then ask what central banks should do about 
these gaps. We will examine Milton Friedman's K-rule, which says that monetary policy 
should not respond to economic conditions. Then we will examine the famous Taylor 
Rule that ties interest rates to gaps or fluctuations in inflation and employment.  
 

Central Banks and Monetary Policy 
Professor Ralf Meisenzahl 
 
26
 
Remember the Federal Reserve dual mandate, maximum employment, and stable 
prices. Let's first focus on maximum employment and describe how this target can be 
achieved. Unemployment and GDP are closely connected. This relationship is called 
Okun's Law. As a result, we often talk about economic growth and unemployment 
interchangeably. When an economy is fully utilizing its resources, we say that the 
economy is producing its potential GDP. When the economy is at potential GDP, this 
implies full or maximum employment. This is just about the best we can hope for. To 
achieve maximum employment, central bankers need to know if the economy close to 
potential GDP.  
 

Central Banks and Monetary Policy 
Professor Ralf Meisenzahl 
 
27
 
What does this look like in the data? In the chart, you can see an estimate of potential 
real GDP of the US through 2030. A branch of the US government. The Congressional 
Budget Office estimates potential GDP. This is a purely theoretical construct. It grows 
over time due to projected improvements in technology, education, and demographic 
trends.  
 

Central Banks and Monetary Policy 
Professor Ralf Meisenzahl 
 
28
Here's the actual Real GDP. While the two track each other closely, there are notable 
deviations.  
 
 
This chart shows these deviations. It is calculated as the percent point difference 
between the actual real GDP, and potential GDP. This is called the output gap or the 
GDP gap. There are times when the output gap is positive. These are boom times when 
the economy runs hot. Resources are used more than they will be in the long run. 

Central Banks and Monetary Policy 
Professor Ralf Meisenzahl 
 
29
Workers may work overtime and extra shifts, and so on. Positive gaps are less common 
and small in magnitude.  
 
 
In contrast, negative output gaps can be large and longer lasting.  
 
 
Let's now layer on the unemployment rate. We see that when the output gap is 
negative, unemployment is higher than usual. The decade beginning in 2008 is a clear 

Central Banks and Monetary Policy 
Professor Ralf Meisenzahl 
 
30
example. What is the key insight here? Using the output gap as input for monetary 
policy makes a lot of sense when maximum employment is one of your goals.  
 
 
Moving on, the second part of the Federal Reserve's mandate is stable prices. Stable 
prices mean a low inflation rate. But how low? Academics such as John Taylor have 
suggested that Central Banks should use a 2% target. The Federal Reserve seems to 
agree. Since 2012, the FMC has announced it structures an annual rate of 2% 
consumer price inflation to be most consistent over the longer run with the Federal 
Reserve's statutory mandate. Similarly, the European Central Bank shoots for inflation 
below, but close to 2%. Just with the output gap, we can calculate an inflation gap. This 
measures how much inflation differs from the Central Bank's 2% target rate.  
 

Central Banks and Monetary Policy 
Professor Ralf Meisenzahl 
 
31
 
This graph shows you the annual growth rate of personal consumption expenditure. 
This is a measure of consumer price inflation. We can see that inflation was above the 
2% target in the 1970s and 1980s. On the other hand, from the mid 1990s through 
2020, inflation was consistently below 2%.  
 
How should the Central Bank respond to fluctuation in unemployment and inflation? 

Central Banks and Monetary Policy 
Professor Ralf Meisenzahl 
 
32
Should they respond at all? Nobel Prize winning economist Milton Friedman was 
skeptical that central banks could make a difference.  
 
 
Instead, Friedman proposed what is now known as the K-rule. The central bank should 
simply increase the money supply by a constant K percent every year, say 3%. Clearly, 
this rule ignores economic conditions. The central bank has no leeway and just follows 
the preprogrammed algorithm. Why is this a good rule? Well, if large increases in the 
money supply cause inflation, then moderate money growth should keep prices stable. 
Another advantage of this rule is that financial markets and businesses can perfectly 
anticipate all monetary policy actions and base their decisions on it. The belief is that 
keeping the money supply under control and predictable would promote economic and 
financial stability. The other class of monetary policy rules are designed to respond to 
economic conditions. If business cycles are costly, then smoothing them out might 
benefit society. The most famous rule is the so-called Taylor rule, which ties interest 
rate decisions to fluctuations in output and inflation.  
 

Central Banks and Monetary Policy 
Professor Ralf Meisenzahl 
 
33
 
Let's look at the Taylor rule. It was originally proposed by academic John Taylor in the 
1990s. To begin, recall that the nominal interest rate is equal to the real interest rate, R, 
and inflation π. Let's assume that inflation is at the target of 2%. Let's also assume that 
the real interest rate in equilibrium is 0.5%. Assuming that inflation is sitting at target, 
the nominal interest rate will be 2.5%. That's what the market will deliver without any 
intervention by the central bank. However, the central bank can choose a different 
nominal interest rate if it wants to.  
 

Central Banks and Monetary Policy 
Professor Ralf Meisenzahl 
 
34
 
In fact, let's assume that the central bank chooses the target interest rate to explicitly 
account for the inflation gap and output gaps with weights Alpha and Beta. There's your 
simple Taylor rule. This says the target interest rate should be whatever the markets 
want plus an adjustment for economic conditions.  
 
 
More precisely, it says that the central bank should increase the interest rate when there 
is a positive inflation gap or a positive output gap. This should cool down the economy.  

Central Banks and Monetary Policy 
Professor Ralf Meisenzahl 
 
35
 
 
And it says the opposite, when there's a negative inflation gap or a negative output gap. 
This should stimulate the economy. The simple rule captures the elements for decision 
making at the Federal Reserve. Both stable prices and maximum employment appear in 
the formula. Of course, we need to find values for the inflation weight Alpha and the 
output gap weight Beta. Taylor's original recommendation was to give equal weight, 
setting them both to 0.5. Economic researchers have since conducted numerous 
studies to see what these weights should be. Nowadays, the consensus for the inflation 
weight Alpha is 1.5, while the estimate for the output gap weight Beta varies between 
0.5 and 1. Using monetary policy to stabilize business cycles has been the norm for 
many central banks in the modern era, but has this approach been successful? Based 
on the US experience since the 1980s, you might cautiously conclude, yes.  
 

Central Banks and Monetary Policy 
Professor Ralf Meisenzahl 
 
36
 
Here is inflation, unemployment, and interest rates in the United States since 1980. 
When the 1990 recession started, the Federal Reserve cut the interest rate. 
Unemployment rates dropped below the prerecession level within four years, and 
inflation remained low throughout the 1990s. This pattern repeats itself after the-dot-
com bubble bursts in early 2000. More generally, the low volatility in the macroeconomic 
variables since the 1990s has been attributed to central bankers and their interest rate 
decisions.  
 

Central Banks and Monetary Policy 
Professor Ralf Meisenzahl 
 
37
 
Let's wrap up. In this session, we covered the design of monetary policy rules. We first 
described how monetary policy targets could be measured in terms of output and 
inflation gaps. We then discussed how monetary policy rules can be designed to react 
to these targets. We saw this in the context of the simple Taylor rule. Finally, we saw 
how interventions by the Federal Reserve seems to have succeeded in the 1980s and 
the early 2000s.  
 
 

Central Banks and Monetary Policy 
Professor Ralf Meisenzahl 
 
38
Lesson 3-2: Transmission of Monetary Policy 
Lesson 3-2.1. How Do Changes in Monetary Policy Affect the Economy?  
  
Hello, and welcome to this lecture on the Transmission of Monetary Policy to the 
Economy. In this session, we are going to summarize how monetary policy decisions 
spread through the economy. In the United States, the Federal Reserve adjusts 
monetary policy in response to changing economic conditions. Remember, the goal is 
maximum employment and stable prices. The most common response is raising or 
lowering the short-term interest rate, the federal funds rate. A change in the federal 
funds rate will lead to changes in other interest rates and in broader financial market 
conditions. In turn, those changes will then affect the spending decisions of individual 
households and businesses. Finally, these individual effects will aggregate to the 
macroeconomic scale. This should feed into economy wide growth, employment, and 
inflation. Our goal is to understand how this chain of events plays out. This will improve 
our understanding of how monetary policy works. Let's get started.  
 

Central Banks and Monetary Policy 
Professor Ralf Meisenzahl 
 
39
 
As the then Federal Reserve Governor Jeremy Stein put it in a speech in 2013, 
monetary policy has one important advantage, namely that it gets in all the cracks. The 
one thing, a commercial bank, a broker dealer, an offshore hedge fund, and a special 
purpose asset backed commercial paper vehicle have in common is that they all face 
the same set of market interest rates. To the extent that market rates exert an influence 
on risk appetite or on the incentives to engage in maturity transformation, changes in 
rates may reach into all corners of the market. Let's first examine the impact of 
monetary policy on market interest rates. The federal funds rate is an overnight interest 
rate. Banks can earn this interest rate if they want to. Other short term interest rates are 
substitute investments. This means that other short term interest rates should track 
changes in the federal funds rate.  
 

Central Banks and Monetary Policy 
Professor Ralf Meisenzahl 
 
40
 
Let's compare the yield. That is the rate of return on three months Treasury Bills and the 
federal funds rate. The graph shows that the difference between the two is close to 
zero. This means that the yield on three months Treasury bills moves almost one to one 
with the federal funds rate.  
 
How about longer-term interest rates? The graph now shows you the difference 

Central Banks and Monetary Policy 
Professor Ralf Meisenzahl 
 
41
between the yield on the 10-year Treasury note and the federal funds rate. You can see 
that there is no one to one relationship.  
 
 
More generally, the effect of a federal funds rate change on short term interest rates will 
be large. However, the effect on longer term rates will be mooted. Long term rates 
incorporate expectations over longer horizons. These rates respond to how people 
expect the federal funds rate to change in the future, not just today. For example, 
suppose markets believe that monetary policy is going to tighten substantially over the 
next several years. In this case, longer term interest rates today could be much higher 
than short term interest rates. This is one reason why forward-looking statements about 
future federal fund rate changes are heavily scrutinized by financial market participants.  
 

Central Banks and Monetary Policy 
Professor Ralf Meisenzahl 
 
42
 
Moving on, how does a change in interest rates impact households and businesses? 
Let's assume that long term interest rates are declining because of an easing of 
monetary policy. This will make it cheaper for firms to take out loans and invest. 
Similarly, consumer loans and mortgages become cheaper. This stimulates spending 
on durable goods such as appliances, as well as homeownership. Lower longer term 
interest rates will also make yields on US dollar assets less attractive to international 
investors.  
 

Central Banks and Monetary Policy 
Professor Ralf Meisenzahl 
 
43
 
These investors may reduce their demand for dollar denominated assets, lowering the 
value of the dollar. A weaker dollar tends to boost US exports as US goods become 
cheaper abroad. At the same time, imported goods become more expensive, giving US 
consumers and firms an incentive to purchase domestically produced goods.  
 
 
Let's put all these pieces together. We have effects for businesses and effects for 
households. Longer term interest rate changes also affect stock prices. Usually, we 

Central Banks and Monetary Policy 
Professor Ralf Meisenzahl 
 
44
think about the market value of a firm as the discounted value of all future dividends. 
When longer term interest rates decrease, the discount rate for future dividends 
becomes more favorable. This increases the market value of a firm and therefore its 
stock price. This increase in stock prices increases personal wealth, which further 
increases consumption. The belief is that stimulating the economy with lower interest 
rates will lead to lower unemployment. This will also lead to higher prices according to 
the Phillips curve. That's the theory. Let's now see how these effects play out in the 
data. We will examine a surprise increase in the federal funds rate. We want to know 
what happens to industrial production, the money supply, the unemployment rate, and 
inflation. The charts we will see are based on time series statistical analysis estimated 
on monthly data. We will measure the effects over a two-year time horizon.  
 
 
The first graph shows you what happens to the federal funds rate after a one-time 
surprise increase of 50 basis points. Notice that the interest rate is likely to further 
increase in the short run. However, over time, the effect of the interest rate surprise 
wears off and we revert to where we began.  
 

Central Banks and Monetary Policy 
Professor Ralf Meisenzahl 
 
45
 
Here is the M2 money supply. The Federal Reserve implements federal fund rate 
increases with open market operations. Remember that an open market operation 
involves the Fed selling securities and receiving cash in form of bank reserves in return. 
Reserves are part of the money supply here measured with M2. Increasing the federal 
funds rate causes the money supply to shrink. It takes about two years for this effect to 
subside.  
 

Central Banks and Monetary Policy 
Professor Ralf Meisenzahl 
 
46
Here's industrial production. The graph shows that it takes about six months for 
industrial production to go down. This is an important point. Monetary policy affects the 
economy there is a lack. This happens for at least two reasons. First, firms may have 
already received funding for investment plans and are still implementing them. Second, 
it may take some time until changes in the interest rate affect consumer spending.  
 
Unemployment is the mirror image of industrial production. It takes a couple of months, 

Central Banks and Monetary Policy 
Professor Ralf Meisenzahl 
 
47
but with industrial production declining, the unemployment rate starts to rise. In addition, 
there is evidence that inflation goes down when the federal funds rate is raised. If the 
Central Bank increases the federal funds rate because it is concerned about the 
economy running hard, then over the medium run, unemployment will increase, and 
inflation will come down.  
 
 
Let's wrap up. In this class, we have summarized how monetary policy transmits to 
financial markets and the real economy. On aggregate level we described how 
monetary policy should affect short- and longer-term interest rates, exchange rates, 
stock prices, and eventually consumption and investment. Then we looked at empirical 
evidence confirming that after the price increase in the federal funds rate, the money 
supply falls immediately and then industrial production goes down, unemployment 
increases, and inflation declines. These effects take time to appear, indicating that 
monetary policy affects the economy with the time lag.  
  

Central Banks and Monetary Policy 
Professor Ralf Meisenzahl 
 
48
Lesson 3-2: Transmission of Monetary Policy 
Lesson 3-2.2. Monetary Policy Transmission Through Banks  
  
Hello and welcome to this lecture on the bank lending channel of monetary policy. In 
this class, we examine how monetary policy affects credit supply from banks. We will 
discuss three mechanisms. Net interest rate margin, reserves, and deposits.  
 

Central Banks and Monetary Policy 
Professor Ralf Meisenzahl 
 
49
 
Consider the business model of a bank. A bank borrows short-term from depositors and 
money market funds and uses these funds to originate longer-term loans. Since short-
term interest rates are usually lower than long-term interest rates, the bank makes 
money by exploiting this difference between short-term and long-term interest rates.  
 
 
The difference between net interest income of banks from loans and mortgages, and 
interest expenses paid by the banks to depositors is called the net interest margin. The 

Central Banks and Monetary Policy 
Professor Ralf Meisenzahl 
 
50
net interest margin measures the profitability of a bank. The larger the net interest 
margin, the higher the profits.  
 
 
This graph shows you the net interest margins of banks in the United States since the 
1980s. As you can see, the net interest margin of banks has decreased over time.  
 
At the same time, you can see that the net interest margin significantly increases 

Central Banks and Monetary Policy 
Professor Ralf Meisenzahl 
 
51
around 2010, when the Federal Reserve cut the federal funds rate to zero for the first 
time.  
 
 
Let's see how monetary policy affects the net interest margin, in a simple example, 
consider a bank that is entirely funded by deposits worth $100. The interest rate on 
deposits is 2% so total interest expenses are $2.  
 

Central Banks and Monetary Policy 
Professor Ralf Meisenzahl 
 
52
The bank has issued one $100 fixed-rate mortgage that pays 5% interest.  
 
 
The interest income is $5 less $2 interest expenses gives you a net interest margin of 
$3 or 3%.  
 

Central Banks and Monetary Policy 
Professor Ralf Meisenzahl 
 
53
 
Now assume that the Federal Reserve increases the federal funds rate from 2% to 3%. 
Since the market for federal funds is an overnight lending market, all other overnight 
and short-term interest rates will increase. Deposits are redeemable on demand, and as 
such, are very similar to overnight loans. If a bank does not want to lose deposits, the 
bank will have to increase the deposit rate accordingly. The bank must pay 3% for its 
deposits, but the interest rate on the fixed-rate mortgage has not changed. The net 
interest margin, therefore, falls from 3% to 2%.  
 

Central Banks and Monetary Policy 
Professor Ralf Meisenzahl 
 
54
 
A falling net interest margin means lower profits. Lower profits in turn mean less capital 
for new loans. In other words, monetary policy directly affects bank profits and therefore 
credit supply of banks. Of course, how strongly monetary policy impacts profits depends 
on the share of fixed-rate loans a bank has on its balance sheet. Some loans, such as 
loans to firms are typically floating interest-rate loans and hence the net interest margin 
on these loans is not affected by monetary policy.  
 

Central Banks and Monetary Policy 
Professor Ralf Meisenzahl 
 
55
The second way monetary policy affects banks is through reserves held by banks in 
their Federal Reserve accounts, those are called federal funds. When the Federal 
Reserve raises the federal funds rate, it typically does so by conducting open market 
operations. That is, the Federal Reserve sells securities to banks. The banks pay for the 
purchases of securities with reserves. With less reserves available in the federal fund 
market credit supply in the short term, funding market goes down. Banks use the federal 
funds market for short-term liquidity needs, for instance, when issuing loans. Of course, 
banks can also borrow in other markets, but often that funding is more expensive or 
requires collateral like for instance, the Repo market. When there's less funding 
available to banks, or the remaining available funding is more expensive, then banks 
reduce their credit supply. Hence, monetary policy reduces the credit supply of banks by 
reducing reserves.  
 

Central Banks and Monetary Policy 
Professor Ralf Meisenzahl 
 
56
 
Another way banks are affected by monetary policy is through deposits. Recall the 
simple example I gave for the net interest margin. In that example, the banks match the 
increases in the federal funds rate. However, as most of you know from your checking 
and savings accounts, banks are usually not fast when it comes to increases in interest 
rates on checking and savings accounts.  
 
Most depositors tend to not look for investment alternatives because it takes time. It 

Central Banks and Monetary Policy 
Professor Ralf Meisenzahl 
 
57
takes even more time to switch banks because you must change all your bank 
information everywhere. Even so, depositors have alternatives most find it too costly or 
too tedious to take advantage of these alternatives. Therefore, retail deposits are 
referred to as sticky and not sensitive to interest rates. However, some depositors 
especially those with sizable deposits, do switch. They tend to withdraw their deposits 
from banks when the difference between the deposit rate and interest rates on 
alternative investments increases. The closer substitute to deposits is money market 
mutual funds.  
 
 
The graph shows total assets of money market mutual funds and the federal funds rate. 
As you can see, when the Federal Reserve increases the federal funds rate, for 
instance between 2004 and 2006 or 2016 and 2019 assets of money market mutual 
funds grew much faster.  
 

Central Banks and Monetary Policy 
Professor Ralf Meisenzahl 
 
58
 
The reduction in deposits also means that banks have less funding and hence must 
reduce their credit supply. You may wonder why this behavior is optimal for banks. 
Banks face a choice between losing some deposits and foregoing some opportunities to 
originate loans and increasing interest rates on all deposits. For differently, would you 
rather lose 5% of deposits and originate 5% less loans or increase the interest rates on 
all deposits by 1% age points and keep your current pace of lending? Recent research 
suggests that banks are strategic about where they increase deposit rates. Within the 
United States, deposit rates tend to increase faster in places where there is more bank 
competition. This suggests that the easier it is to switch banks, the more banks must 
respond to changes in interest rates to retain their deposits. The flip side of this finding 
is that in places or countries with highly concentrated banking system, this deposit 
channel of monetary policy is less important.  
 

Central Banks and Monetary Policy 
Professor Ralf Meisenzahl 
 
59
 
What have we learned in this lesson? Monetary policy affects banks through three 
channels. First, increases in the federal funds rate compresses the net interest margin 
reducing profits. Second, increases in the federal funds rate reduce reserves available 
in the banking system. Third, increases in the federal funds rate led to an outflow of 
deposits reducing bank funds. All three channels imply that increases in the federal 
funds rate reduce the overall supply of credit by banks.  
 
 

Central Banks and Monetary Policy 
Professor Ralf Meisenzahl 
 
60
Lesson 3-2: Transmission of Monetary Policy 
Lesson 3-2.3. Monetary Policy Transmission Through Banks  
  
Hello, and welcome to this lecture on the transmission of monetary policy through 
businesses and households. Our goal in this class is to better understand how changes 
in the interest rates are passed through to borrowing costs. We will see how these 
matters for businesses, particularly small and financially constrained firms that do 
depend on variable rate bank loans. This can have knock-on effects for investments and 
jobs in the economy. We will then examine how the same channel impacts households. 
Here, we will focus on the housing market and mortgage loans. We will see how 
changes in interest rates matter for households with the option to refinance their 
mortgage. Then we will discuss the implications for aggregate demand in the economy. 
Let's get started.  
 

Central Banks and Monetary Policy 
Professor Ralf Meisenzahl 
 
61
 
Let's first look at businesses. Almost all firms take out some form of debt. The largest 
corporations have access to the bond market, which is fixed rate debt. Smaller firms 
typically only have access to bank loans. These business loans often have a floating or 
variable interest rate. This means the loan interest rate is equal to some floating 
benchmark plus some fixed mark-up. The floating benchmark could be one of in the 
past, the London Inter-Bank Offer Rate or LIBOR, the Secured Overnight Financing 
Rate, or SOFR, or possibly the prime rate, which is the interest rate offered to the best 
borrowers. In general, this means that the interest rate that the firm pays moves with 
short term interest rates.  
 

Central Banks and Monetary Policy 
Professor Ralf Meisenzahl 
 
62
 
Let's see how this connects to monetary policy with an example. Assume that a firm has 
one-million-dollar business loan. Let's assume that the interest rate on this loan is 
SOFR plus 2%. Like the federal funds rate, SOFR is an overnight interest rate and the 
two move closely together. Let's assume that the federal funds rate and SOFR are 
currently 4%, this means the loan interest rate is 6% and total annual interest payments 
are $60,000.  
 

Central Banks and Monetary Policy 
Professor Ralf Meisenzahl 
 
63
Now let's assume that the FMC decides to cut the federal funds rate to 1%, the SOFR 
will follow this downward move. This means that the interest rate on the firm's loan will 
reset from 6% to 3% reducing the interest rate payments to $30,000. The reduction in 
the federal funds rate hence frees up $30,000 that the firm could use for investment and 
hiring.  
 
More generally, a reduction in the federal funds rate will increase the profits of 

Central Banks and Monetary Policy 
Professor Ralf Meisenzahl 
 
64
leveraged firms. Another implication of higher profits is that the firm's balance sheets, 
and equity valuation will improve. With higher profits, the firm is in a better financial 
position. This may further reduce borrowing costs.  
 
 
Does the data support these ideas? Well, yes and no. Research has examined how 
businesses respond to an increase in the federal funds rate and whether it matters for 
the economy as a whole. The research indicates that large firms are mostly unaffected 
when rates increase. They maintain their levels of production and employment when 
interest costs increase and revenue declines. These larger firms have no problems 
accessing commercial paper markets and other sources of short-term credit. This allows 
them to increase their short-term borrowing, even when profits decline. At the same 
time, the inventories of large firms grow. In sharp contrast, the transmission of monetary 
policy to the borrowing costs of small firms matters a lot more. Smaller, more financially 
constrained firms respond to an increase in interest rate costs by reducing inventory 
and by cutting work hours and production. Importantly for the economy as whole, the 
effect is still sizable. This is because smaller firms still employ more than one half of all 
workers in the United States. Moving on, let's now examine how households respond to 
monetary policy. That's not to say that all households are carefully reading statements 
from the FMC. However, their decision making will react to prevailing economic 
conditions, including changing market interest rates. The largest line item on a 
household's balance sheet is usually their mortgage.  
 

Central Banks and Monetary Policy 
Professor Ralf Meisenzahl 
 
65
 
This graph shows you the interest rate on 30-year fixed rate mortgage and the federal 
funds rate. As you can see, the two rates move together so mortgage rates will react to 
changes in monetary policy.  
 
 
How big of an effect can we expect from mortgage rate changes? The answer depends 
on how indebted households are. If households have zero debt, then changing 
borrowing costs will be irrelevant. The map shows you the median debt to income ratios 

Central Banks and Monetary Policy 
Professor Ralf Meisenzahl 
 
66
for households across all counties in the United States in 2007, right before the 2008 
financial crisis. As you can see, many counties have households with debt that is more 
than three times their annual income. With such high borrowing relative to annual 
income, changes in the interest rate may have sizable effects on household finances. 
While some mortgages in the United States have an adjustable interest rate, most 
mortgages are fixed rate. When the FMC decides to lower the federal funds rate, 
mortgage rates tend to decrease as well. In response, households may decide to 
refinance their current mortgage. This means the household replaces the current 
mortgage with a lower interest rate mortgage. Also, this can involve upfront cost. The 
interest rate savings due to refinancing can be substantial. Let's go back to the craft with 
the mortgage interest rate but focus on the 21st century.  
 
 
In 2006, the mortgage interest rate was about 6.5%, in December 2011, it had fallen 
below 4%. A household that had not paid any principle could save almost 40% on 
mortgage interest expenses by refinancing their mortgage, and a lot of people did. 
Recent research found that the average household that refinanced saved almost $1,000 
per month in mortgage payments.  
 

Central Banks and Monetary Policy 
Professor Ralf Meisenzahl 
 
67
 
What did the households do with the extra cash? Household that saved on mortgage 
payments tend to consume more. For instance, people may go out for dinner or start 
renovating their house. Spending on durable goods and cars increases. As a result, the 
demand for goods and services goes up, which benefits businesses and stimulates the 
economy.  
 
Let's wrap up. In this lesson, we were specific about how monetary policy transmits to 

Central Banks and Monetary Policy 
Professor Ralf Meisenzahl 
 
68
the economy. When the Central Bank changes the interest rate, this can impact the 
interest expenses of businesses and households. We saw that the effects matter for 
small financially constrained businesses. We also saw how a lower policy rate reduces 
mortgage payments of households. In the aggregate, lower interest payments can 
stimulate greater consumption and investment. This means the overall demand for 
goods and services goes up.  
 
 

Central Banks and Monetary Policy 
Professor Ralf Meisenzahl 
 
69
Lesson 3-3: Limits of Monetary Policy 
Lesson 3-3.1. Limits of Monetary Policy: Supply Shocks  
  
Hello, and welcome to this lecture on stagflation. In this class, we consider the period in 
the 1970s that was marked by low growth, high inflation, and high unemployment. This 
case study will help us to better understand the tradeoffs and limits of monetary policy. 
The term stagflation is a combination of stagnation and inflation. Stagflation is 
particularly challenging for central banks. To stimulate the economy, central banks 
lower interest rates, however, low interest rates also tend to increase inflation. In a 
situation where growth is low, and inflation is high, central banks have limited options.  
 

Central Banks and Monetary Policy 
Professor Ralf Meisenzahl 
 
70
 
The craft shows you consumer price inflation from 1960 to 1990. You can see that 
during the late 1960s, inflation started to accelerate. The largest spikes are in 1974 and 
1980, when the inflation rate hit 11 and 13.5 respectively. Let's look at the reasons for 
these spikes.  
 
 
The main reason are two large oil shocks. The first oil shock was triggered by an oil 
embargo of OPEC against the United States and other mostly Western countries in the 

Central Banks and Monetary Policy 
Professor Ralf Meisenzahl 
 
71
wake of the Yom Kippur War. Within a few months, the price of oil rose nearly 300 
percent from three dollars per barrel to about 11 dollars.  
 
 
This was an enormous cost shock to the economy, since almost all parts of the 
economy used oil as an import, for instance, in form of gasoline or for power generation 
or in the chemical industry, producer prices increased drastically. At the same time, 
consumers had to pay more for gas and heating, reducing their spending on other 
consumption goods.  
 

Central Banks and Monetary Policy 
Professor Ralf Meisenzahl 
 
72
 
Just a couple of years later, the second oil shock hit the economy. In the wake of the 
Iranian revolution in 1979 and the beginning of the Iran-Iraq War in 1980, oil production 
declined. As a result of declining oil supply and uncertainty about future oil supply, oil 
prices skyrocketed. In 1980, the price of oil reached 39 dollars and 50 cents per barrel. 
A more than tenfold increase since early 1973. In the US, the car manufacturers were 
particularly hard hit as they struggled to offer more fuel-efficient cars. These large 
shocks led to a slowdown of the economy.  
 

Central Banks and Monetary Policy 
Professor Ralf Meisenzahl 
 
73
 
In the graph you see the unemployment rate. It reached a post-World War II high of nine 
percent in 1975 and decreased again with the second oil shock in 1981, reaching 7.8 
percent. Recall that the Federal Reserve's mandate is stable prices and maximum 
employment. But the oil shocks produce the opposite effects, high inflation, and high 
unemployment. The oil shocks are examples of supply shocks.  
 
The craft illustrates how supply shocks shift out the tradeoff between unemployment 

Central Banks and Monetary Policy 
Professor Ralf Meisenzahl 
 
74
and inflation, which is also called the Phillips Curve. We discuss the Phillips Curve in 
detail in a separate lecture.  
 
 
When facing supply shocks, the options of monetary policy are limited as lower interest 
rates do not affect supply constraints. Indeed, many responses to the oil shocks were 
not monetary, but affected oil demand in the short and in the long run. The most drastic 
short-term response to the 1973 oil shock was rationing gas in the United States. For 
instance, vehicle with license blades having an odd number could buy gas only on odd 
numbered days, while others could buy only on even numbered days. Responses with 
considerable long-term impact on oil demand eventually helped to reduce oil prices. 
Here are a couple of examples. To reduce gas consumption, a national maximum 
speed limit of 55 miles per hour was imposed in 1974. A year later in 1975, the 
corporate average fuel economy standards were created. These standards required 
better fuel economy for cars and light trucks in the US. At the same time, the US 
developed the Strategic Petroleum Reserve.  
 

Central Banks and Monetary Policy 
Professor Ralf Meisenzahl 
 
75
 
These measures and increases in production eventually led to the so-called oil glut in 
the 1980s. Oil prices dropped considerably and contributed to bringing down inflation.  
 
 
These supply shocks in the 1980s help shifting back the tradeoff between inflation and 
unemployment. As you can see in the graph, in the second half of the 1980s, 
considerably less inflation was needed to reduce unemployment when compared to the 
early 1980s.  

Central Banks and Monetary Policy 
Professor Ralf Meisenzahl 
 
76
 
 
Even so, monetary policy can do little to counter its supply shocks. This period caused a 
change in inflation expectations. That is, the consensus shifted from a low inflation 
regime to a regime in which inflation would remain high.  
 
 
High inflation expectation led to high wage demands, which in turn increase inflation.  
 

Central Banks and Monetary Policy 
Professor Ralf Meisenzahl 
 
77
 
When Paul Volcker became the Chairman of the Federal Reserve in 1979, he wanted to 
bring down inflation and inflation expectations.  
 
 
He did so by raising the Federal funds rate, which reached 19 percent in December 
1981. The sharp increases in interest rates, together with increasing oil prices, triggered 
the 1980 and 1982 recessions.  
 

Central Banks and Monetary Policy 
Professor Ralf Meisenzahl 
 
78
 
Unemployment rose to over 10 percent the highest level between the end of World War 
II and the COVID- 19 pandemic. In other words, in this period, the Federal Reserve 
chose to focus on inflation rather than unemployment despite the dual mandate of 
stable prices and maximum employment, raising the federal funds rate led to a large 
drop in inflation.  
 
More importantly, the Federal Reserve accepted the price of temporary higher 

Central Banks and Monetary Policy 
Professor Ralf Meisenzahl 
 
79
unemployment to bring down inflation. This was seen as a credible commitment to low 
inflation in the future. This commitment in turn, brought down inflation expectations, 
which helped to establish a low inflation regime.  
 
 
What have we learned in this lesson? First, supply shocks, such as oil price shocks, can 
shift the tradeoff between inflation and unemployment. Second, monetary policy is not 
an effective tool to counteract supply shocks. Third, if supply shocks move inflation 
expectations permanently, central banks may have to accept high unemployment 
temporarily, to bring down inflation and inflation expectations.  
 
 

Central Banks and Monetary Policy 
Professor Ralf Meisenzahl 
 
80
Lesson 3-3: Limits of Monetary Policy 
Lesson 3-3.2. Limits of Monetary Policy: Jobless Recoveries and Risk- Taking 
Incentives  
  
Hello, and welcome to this lecture on the limits of monetary policy. In this class, we will 
consider times when monetary policy hasn't worked very well. We will examine two 
related issues. First, the idea of a jobless recovery. This term was first used to describe 
the recovery from the 1991 recession. Despite significant cuts to interest rates by the 
Federal Reserve, the labor market recovered more slowly than expected. We will try to 
understand why this can happen. We will then consider an unintended consequence of 
loose monetary policy excessive risk-taking. Lowering interest rates can stimulate the 
economy. However, what if rates are kept too low for too long? Some argue that this 
might cause financial instability. We will examine this argument in detail. Let's get 
started.  
 

Central Banks and Monetary Policy 
Professor Ralf Meisenzahl 
 
81
 
Historically, unemployment had dropped sharply after recessions ended. Look, for 
instance, at what happened after the recession of 1982. In contrast, after the 1991 
recession, the unemployment rate came down only gradually. This was despite the 
Federal Reserve keeping rates low for three years and GDP growing by over 5% 
between 1992 and 1995. This slow recovery in the labor market puzzled economists. 
The same pattern emerged after the recession in 2001. The Federal Reserve cut the 
federal funds rate from 6.5% to 1% in response to the recession, and it did not increase 
the federal funds rate until the summer of 2004. Unemployment, however, did not start 
to fall until the summer of 2003, and even then, the decline was only gradual. This type 
of monetary policy accommodation at such low interest rates was unprecedented. For 
this reason, economists now refer to the early 2000s as the jobless recovery.  
 

Central Banks and Monetary Policy 
Professor Ralf Meisenzahl 
 
82
 
Let us examine first what the data tell us about the labor market and the 2001 jobless 
recovery. Indicators for the labor market suggested that workers faced significant 
challenges finding jobs. First, labor force participation, particularly among younger 
workers, declined. Second, unemployment duration increased significantly. Third, a 
popular index of help wanted advertising, a measure of job vacancies, remained below 
its recession levels. The evidence suggests that firms were just not hiring as much as 
expected.  
 

Central Banks and Monetary Policy 
Professor Ralf Meisenzahl 
 
83
 
In addition, the current employment statistics survey showed that as of the end of 
September 2003. Non-farm payroll employment had fallen by some 2.8 million jobs 
since the beginning of the recession in March 2001. The manufacturing sector was by 
far the hardest hit sector. About 2.4 million of the 2.8 million jobs lost were in the 
manufacturing sector. Let's dig deeper.  
 
Why was the labor market response so slow? And why was the manufacturing sector hit 

Central Banks and Monetary Policy 
Professor Ralf Meisenzahl 
 
84
so hard? There are two main explanations. The first is high uncertainty about the 
economy. This makes firms reluctant to invest or hire. In the early two thousands, the 
most obvious source of uncertainty were the September 11 terrorist attacks and the 
aftermath, including the wars in Afghanistan and Iraq. Second, the manufacturing 
employment losses were due to structural changes in the US economy. Structural 
change means the permanent decline of certain industries, the decline of manufacturing 
was not new.  
 
 
The share of workers employed in the manufacturing sector collapsed beginning in the 
early 1980s. This was partly driven by international competition.  
 

Central Banks and Monetary Policy 
Professor Ralf Meisenzahl 
 
85
 
Most notable was the increased competition in the auto market, where Japanese and 
Western European automakers expanded into the US market. This happened after the 
1980 oil crisis. Structural change is usually a slow process. This makes the 
consequences hard to gauge for policymakers in real time. When you look back at the 
discussions of the early 2000, one factor is notably absent. On December 11, 2001, 
China became a member of the World Trade Organization. As a result, US trade policy 
eliminated potential tariff increases on Chinese air imports. Recent research has found 
that shop losses in manufacturing were concentrated in US firms that faced import 
competition from China.  
 

Central Banks and Monetary Policy 
Professor Ralf Meisenzahl 
 
86
 
Can monetary policy be effective when uncertainty is high or structural change is 
underway? In general, monetary policy can reduce uncertainty about future economic 
developments by promising accommodative monetary policy now and in the future. This 
involves the use of forward guidance. However, in the case of the early 2000s, the 
uncertainty was caused by terrorist attacks and subsequent wars. Monetary policy 
probably could not reduce this type of uncertainty. Similarly, monetary policy can do 
little to reduce the employment effects of structural change. We would expect jobs lost 
in declining industries to be replaced eventually with jobs in growing industries, for 
instance, in the service or tech industry. However, this process can take time. New jobs 
need to be created and workers need to relocate and retrain. Monetary policy works 
best when addressing cyclical fluctuation. It can do little when structural change drives 
unemployment. In the remainder of this session, let's consider the risks of 
accommodative monetary policy. In 2001, Paul McCully, an economist at the investment 
management firm PIMCO, predicted that the extremely low federal funds rate set by the 
Federal Reserve could cause house prices to increase.  
 

Central Banks and Monetary Policy 
Professor Ralf Meisenzahl 
 
87
 
As the graph shows, the mortgage interest rate dropped from over 8% in 2000 to 5% in 
the summer of 2003.  
 
 
Lower mortgage interest rates mean that people can afford new or larger houses. This 
increases demand for houses and house prices. This graph shows that house prices 
increased by over 60% between 2000 and 2006. As a result of rising house prices 
construction boomed. Due to a wealth effect, homeowners used mortgage refinancing 

Central Banks and Monetary Policy 
Professor Ralf Meisenzahl 
 
88
and home equity lines of credit to borrow more against the house. The proceeds were 
then spent on consumer goods, for instance, cars and appliances.  
 
 
As you can see in the graph, home equity lines of credit increased from about 150 
billion in 2000 to 650 billion by late 2005. This is a dramatic increase in credit supply. It 
viewed home construction, consumer spending and job creation.  
 

Central Banks and Monetary Policy 
Professor Ralf Meisenzahl 
 
89
By 2005, then IMF chief economist Raghuram Rajan expressed concern about a 
housing bubble. He argued that low interest rates and financial innovation created a 
situation in which financial market participants took more and more risk. He concluded 
that this risk could threaten the stability of the financial system. In hindsight, we know 
that his analysis was spot on.  
 
The more general point to keep in mind is that low interest rates can lead to a buildup of 

Central Banks and Monetary Policy 
Professor Ralf Meisenzahl 
 
90
risk. Lower interest rates can encourage excessive borrowing. This can fuel an asset 
price bubble in the housing market and financial markets. The link between low interest 
rates and risk-taking has been shown not only for the US, but for all major economies. 
Encouraging risk-taking is one way to stimulate the economy. However, central banks 
need to be mindful of the effects of accommodative monetary policy on the overall 
soundness of the financial system. Since the 2008 financial crisis, financial stability has 
been added to the Federal Reserve's mandate. The Federal Reserve now monitors the 
buildups of risks in the economy.  
 
 
Let's wrap up. We discussed two potential limits of monetary policy. First, monetary 
policy can do little when structural change or uncertainty about external events drives 
up unemployment. Second, loose monetary policy following the jobless recovery in the 
early 2000s may have fueled a house price boom in the United States. This experience 
highlights a more general problem. Lower interest rates can encourage risk-taking and 
can lead to a buildup of risk in the economy.  
