 Central Banks and Monetary Policy 
Professor Ralf Meisenzahl 
 
1 
 
Module 1: Interest Rates  
Table of Contents 
Module 1: Interest Rates ........................................................................................................ 1 
Lesson 1-0.1: Overview ......................................................................................................................................... 2 
Lesson 1-1: Short-term Rates ..........................................................................................................6 
Lesson 1-1.1. The Market for Federal Funds ......................................................................................................... 6 
Lesson 1-1.2. The Repo Market ........................................................................................................................... 15 
Lesson 1-1.3. Short-term Interest Rates ............................................................................................................. 24 
Lesson 1-2: Long-term Rates ......................................................................................................... 33 
Lesson 1-2.1. Nominal and Real Interest Rates ................................................................................................... 33 
Lesson 1-2.2. Treasury Securities and The Risk-Free Rate .................................................................................. 43 
Lesson 1-2.3. Term Structure of Interest Rates .................................................................................................. 52 
Lesson 1-3: Other Funding Markets ............................................................................................... 61 
Lesson 1-3.1. Money Market Mutual Funds ....................................................................................................... 61 
Lesson 1-3.2. Securitization ................................................................................................................................. 72 
 

 Central Banks and Monetary Policy 
Professor Ralf Meisenzahl 
 
2 
Lesson 1-0 Module 1 Information 
Lesson 1-0.1: Overview  
 
Hello and welcome. I hope you're doing well from wherever it is you're joining us. This is 
a course about central banks, monetary policy, and the macro economy. We will 
discuss how monetary policy is implemented and how choices made by the central bank 
are eventually transmitted to the macro economy. You will gain a deeper appreciation of 
the goals of monetary policy. We're going to start with the nuts and bolts of monetary 
policy implementations. You may have heard statements from the central bank such as, 
we are raising the interest rate by 25 basis points, or we are expanding our asset 
purchase program to put downwards pressure on long term interest rates. But what 
does it involve in practice? How does the central bank implement this policy? Which 
interest rates are affected and why? Monetary policy implementation is a complex topic 
that involves several different financial markets and financial instruments. This module 
provides the necessary background and explains exactly which interest’s rates are 
targeted by monetary policy. A word of warning, since monetary policy is only discussed 
in the next module, the videos in this module may feel a little disjointed and you may 
wonder how these videos relate to each other. Let me give you an overview how the 
videos in this module fit into the bigger picture.  
 

 Central Banks and Monetary Policy 
Professor Ralf Meisenzahl 
 
3 
 
The first two videos introduce two short term funding markets, the market for federal 
funds and the repo market. These are important short term funding markets. We 
sometimes call them cash markets or money markets. This is where financial 
institutions come to borrow and lend. These are overnight money markets and are the 
main targets of monetary policy. You may already know that the Federal Reserve 
targets the interest rate in the federal funds markets, the federal funds rate, by 
announcing a target range for this interest rate. The repo market is an alternative to the 
federal funds market. Hence, the Federal Reserve also targets the interest rate in the 
repo market to ensure that all overnight interest rates are consistent with monetary 
policy goals. The next video compares another overnight interest rate, the London 
Interbank Offered Rate, with the repo market interest rate as these interest rates are the 
benchmark for loans to firms. We then examine three key financial instruments that are 
central to the implementation and transmission of monetary policy.  
 

 Central Banks and Monetary Policy 
Professor Ralf Meisenzahl 
 
4 
 
First, we look at government securities. Central banks buy and sell government 
securities to implement monetary policy, so understanding what they are and how they 
work is crucial. Since the US government securities have no default risk, we can also 
look at the components of the interest rates. For instance, how much of the interest rate 
reflects inflation. Since interest rates capture inflation and expectations about the future, 
we can compare the interest rates on shorter and longer maturity government securities 
to help us understand market expectations of future economic developments. We call 
this the term structure of interest rates. The term structure of interest rates is closely 
watched by central banks, investment banks, and financial analysts because it reflects 
the market expectations about the future developments of the economy. We then 
consider money market mutual funds.  
 

 Central Banks and Monetary Policy 
Professor Ralf Meisenzahl 
 
5 
 
Money funds are the largest overnight lenders of cash in the repo market. After the 
2008 financial crisis, the Federal Reserve has started to conduct monetary policy with 
these funds as you will see later in this course. Finally, we consider securitization. 
Securitization has increased credit supply. Pools of securitized mortgages, also known 
as mortgage-backed securities or MBS are especially important. Since monetary policy 
affects the economy by reducing or increasing the supply of credit and the Federal 
Reserve can purchase certain MBS, securitization markets are an important factor in 
monetary policy considerations. In sum, all of the markets and instruments discussed in 
this first module are directly related to monetary policy and its implementation. Each 
video provides a small piece of the larger picture that will become clearer in the next 
module. Please try not to get frustrated if you have a hard time placing each video in the 
bigger picture. Keep in mind that these videos provide the background for 
understanding monetary policy and its implementation. You can always come back to 
these videos later when we discuss specific monetary policy tools that targets the 
markets or instruments or when we discuss financial crisis if you need to refresh your 
understanding of a particular concept.  
 
 

 Central Banks and Monetary Policy 
Professor Ralf Meisenzahl 
 
6 
Lesson 1-1: Short-term Rates 
Lesson 1-1.1. The Market for Federal Funds  
 
Hello, and welcome to this lecture on the federal funds market. I hope you're doing well 
from wherever it is you're joining us. In this class, we will discuss the background and 
workings of the federal funds market. We will proceed in two steps. First, we will 
examine why banks hold reserves at the Federal Reserve. We will distinguish between 
required reserves and excess reserves. Second, we will study the federal funds market. 
In this market, banks borrow and lend excess reserves amongst themselves. We will 
see how this is a crucial overnight-lending market.  
 

 Central Banks and Monetary Policy 
Professor Ralf Meisenzahl 
 
7 
 
Let's first understand what reserves are and why banks hold them. The business model 
of a bank is to borrow short and lend long. Banks take on-demand deposits. They use 
these funds to make loans. This business model creates demand for cash, also known 
as liquidity at the bank. For example, deposits can be withdrawn at any time. So, the 
banks need to have a certain amount of cash on hand that can be used to meet liquidity 
needs. This cash can be held in a reserve account at the Federal Reserve.  
 
 

 Central Banks and Monetary Policy 
Professor Ralf Meisenzahl 
 
8 
How much reserves should a bank choose to hold? This is a difficult question. In the 
United States, banks are legally required to hold a minimum number of reserves at the 
Federal Reserve. These are called required reserves. This reserve requirement is set at 
a level to ensure that banks can meet their day-to-day cash needs. This level is decided 
by the Federal Reserve. Before the COVID-19 pandemic, the reserve requirement was 
three percent of deposits. To support banks during the COVID-19 pandemic, this 
requirement was set to zero. Those are legal requirements.  
 
 
Banks usually hold more reserves than what is required. These are called excess 
reserves. Banks hold these excess reserves to meet unknown liquidity needs. For 
example, early in the COVID-19 pandemic, US corporations drew down about 600 
billion from their credit lines. Banks could not plan for this unforeseeable event. 
Nevertheless, banks had to provide 600 billions of cash to their customers on short 
notice, hence the need for excess reserves.  
 

 Central Banks and Monetary Policy 
Professor Ralf Meisenzahl 
 
9 
 
How do banks choose their level of reserves? Banks can either hold cash in form of 
reserves or they can invest this cash. For example, they could invest in loans that earn 
the bank interest income. What are the trade-offs? Holding reserves typically generates 
lower income as compared with loans. However, if a bank faces an unforeseen liquidity 
need, it may have to borrow at the last minute. This can be costly, so banks face a 
trade-off between their liquidity needs and lost earnings if they had invested in interest-
paying assets. These lost earnings are called the opportunity cost of holding excess 
reserves.  
 

 Central Banks and Monetary Policy 
Professor Ralf Meisenzahl 
 
10
 
Here are the data on reserve holdings of US commercial banks. Historically, reserves 
were low. As you can see, reserves barely increased between the 1960s and 2007.  
 
 
However, since the 2008 financial crisis, reserves have increased significantly. 
Reserves increased from about 40 billion in 2007 to almost three trillion in 2014. They 
further increased to 3.7 trillion in March 2021.  
 

 Central Banks and Monetary Policy 
Professor Ralf Meisenzahl 
 
11
 
Why has there been a sharp increase in reserves since 2008? First, low interest rates 
between 2008 and 2022 reduced the return on interest-paying assets such as loans. 
Second, the Federal Reserve started to pay interest on reserves. These first two factors 
lowered the opportunity costs of excess reserves. Third, banks experienced large cash 
demands during the financial crisis. The surviving banks decided to hold larger reserves 
going forward as a safeguard.  
 

 Central Banks and Monetary Policy 
Professor Ralf Meisenzahl 
 
12
Now, let's look at the federal funds market. What happens when a bank does not have 
enough reserves to cover its liquidity needs? The bank can borrow reserves from other 
banks. This takes place in the federal funds market. Loans in the federal funds market 
are usually overnight and do not require collateral. This means that this market requires 
a lot of confidence that the bank will not fail. The cost of borrowing in this market is 
called the federal funds rate. The federal funds market is a so-called money market, that 
is it provides cash overnight.  
 

 Central Banks and Monetary Policy 
Professor Ralf Meisenzahl 
 
13
 
Why is the federal funds market so important? I want to emphasize two key functions. 
First, the federal funds market reallocates funds between banks. Some banks have a lot 
of lending opportunities, but little cash. Other banks have a lot of cash in forms of 
reserves, but few lending opportunities. Through the federal funds market, the second 
bank can lend the first bank cash. This allows the first bank to meet their loan demand. 
The second important function is that the interest rate for federal funds, the federal 
funds rate, influences the cost of credit in the economy. Banks decide whether to hold 
reserves or to grant loans, such as mortgages. If the federal funds rate is high enough, 
then banks must receive high interest on, say, new mortgages. Otherwise, the bank can 
just hold reserves and lend them out in the federal funds market. Thus, the federal 
funds rate might affect the cost of mortgages. The same logic holds for all other assets, 
not just mortgages. Interest rates across all markets are linked to the federal funds rate. 
However, there will be a stronger effect on short-term maturity assets. Short-maturity 
assets are the closer substitutes to the federal funds market. These substitute overnight 
cash markets will be immediately affected by a change in the federal funds rate. Later in 
this course, we will see that the Central Bank of the United States, the Federal Reserve, 
controls the federal funds rate to achieve its policy goals. The Federal Reserve does 
this by controlling the supply of reserves in the federal funds market. These are called 
open market operations.  
 

 Central Banks and Monetary Policy 
Professor Ralf Meisenzahl 
 
14
 
What have we learned in this lesson? First, banks hold reserves because they are 
required to do so by law. Second, banks hold additional excess reserves to meet 
unforeseen liquidity needs. Third, the federal funds market reallocates cash across the 
banking system. Fourth, the interest rate for federal funds influences all other interest 
rates.  
 
 

 Central Banks and Monetary Policy 
Professor Ralf Meisenzahl 
 
15
Lesson 1-1.2. The Repo Market  
 
Hello and welcome to this lecture on the repo market. I hope you're doing well from 
wherever it is you're joining us. In this class, we will discuss the market for repurchase 
agreements. We will introduce what a repurchase agreement is. These are called repos. 
The repo market is a key overnight lending market. Our goal is to understand how this 
market works. Let's get started. Before I define a repo, I want to describe the size of the 
market. I've already said this is a key market for overnight borrowing and lending. Let's 
see some data on the size of this market for the US economy. By size, I mean total 
dollar borrowing. The repo market started to gain traction in the early 1980s. The growth 
of this market accelerated through the 2000s.  
 

 Central Banks and Monetary Policy 
Professor Ralf Meisenzahl 
 
16
 
Here is some data showing the size of the repo market in the recent years. By the end 
of 2020, more than $4 trillion worth of repo loans were outstanding. That's 4 trillion with 
a “t”. Why is this repo market so popular? The repo market is the largest cash market. 
All types of financial institutions can participate in this market. This is the main 
difference to another important overnight funding market, the federal funds market.  
 
 
The federal funds market can only be accessed by banks.  

 Central Banks and Monetary Policy 
Professor Ralf Meisenzahl 
 
17
 
 
Money market mutual funds are one of the largest lenders in the repo market. Instead of 
buying and holding long term assets, money market mutual funds purchase short term 
repos. At the end of 2019, they held about 1 trillion of outstanding repos.  
 
 
Let's discuss how the repo market works. Remember, this is a cash market. A borrower 
will approach a lender and borrow cash overnight. In the repo market this will be a 

 Central Banks and Monetary Policy 
Professor Ralf Meisenzahl 
 
18
secured transaction. Suppose you need cash today to pay a bill and you have a 
treasury bond on hand. Assume that you will be cash rich tomorrow, so you have a cash 
shortfall today. You could sell the treasury bond today, pay your bill and purchase a new 
treasury bond tomorrow. However, buying and selling bonds can be costly. 
Alternatively, you could borrow the cash you need. 
 
 
Let's discuss how to do this using the treasury bond in a repo transaction. In a repo 
transaction, you sell the treasury bond in exchange for cash and agree to buy it back 
tomorrow. This is called selling a repo. The repo seller is borrowing from the other party. 
The other party, the repo buyer, supplies the cash loan. In exchange, the buyer 
becomes the new owner of the treasury bond for the length of the transaction. In other 
words, this is a secured transaction. The buyer usually buys the treasury bond back for 
a slightly higher price. That way, the seller is compensated for the cash loan. 
 

 Central Banks and Monetary Policy 
Professor Ralf Meisenzahl 
 
19
 
What is the key risk to lenders in the repo transaction? The borrower might fail to 
repurchase the treasury bond tomorrow. In this case, the lender might be stuck with a 
worthless bond. This is more likely to happen when the value of the collateral falls while 
the lender is in possession.  
 
 
Let's consider a concrete example of a repo transaction. Suppose you sell a treasury 
bond worth 200 today with the promise to repurchase it for $200.02 tomorrow. What 

 Central Banks and Monetary Policy 
Professor Ralf Meisenzahl 
 
20
happens if economic conditions change, and the market price drops to 199? You could 
repurchase at 202 cents as promised or you could break your promise and simply buy 
another treasury bond on the open market for 199. What about the lender? They are 
holding a treasury bond worth 199 but had lent out 200. They are probably going to lose 
out. To reduce this risk, repo transactions usually have a haircut. The lender applies this 
haircut to the loan amount. Rather than lending the full amount of the collateral, only a 
fraction goes out. Indeed, haircuts make most repos essentially risk free for the lender.  
 
 
In our example, let's say the lender imposes a haircut of two percent. So, the borrower 
only receives 196 for the treasury bond that is worth 200. How does this help? Well, if 
the market price drops to 199, the borrower will still want to repurchase the bond.  
 

 Central Banks and Monetary Policy 
Professor Ralf Meisenzahl 
 
21
 
So, if the bond price stays above 196, we are good.  
 
 
What determines the size of the haircut? There are three main factors related to the 
collateral. The first factor is the credit quality of the collateral. The lower the credit risk, 
the lower the haircut. The second factor is the market price volatility of the collateral. 
Lower volatility means a lower haircut. The third factor is the overall market condition. 
The easier it is to sell the collateral, the lower is the haircut. Many different assets can 

 Central Banks and Monetary Policy 
Professor Ralf Meisenzahl 
 
22
be used in repo transactions. However, the most common collateral consists of 
government backed securities. This includes the treasury bond in our example. Why are 
treasuries so popular? They have no credit risk. They have stable market prices. They 
are easy to trade. Thus, they present little risk to repo buyers and the haircuts are low.  
 
 
Repo transaction involving government backed securities are low risk. In this case, 
lenders are less picky about the specific type of collateral. Repo transactions that are 
agreed upon before the collateral is specified are called general collateral repo. Here, 
general collateral refers to a list of eligible government backed securities. General 
collateral repos have the lowest haircuts. They are the most common type of repo 
transactions.  
 

 Central Banks and Monetary Policy 
Professor Ralf Meisenzahl 
 
23
 
What have we learned in this lesson? First, repos are a form of short-term secured 
lending. Second, the repo market is an important cash market for all financial institutions 
and not just banks. Third, haircuts reduce the risk of losses for lenders. 
 
 

 Central Banks and Monetary Policy 
Professor Ralf Meisenzahl 
 
24
Lesson 1-1.3. Short-term Interest Rates  
 
Hello and welcome to this lecture on short-term interest rates. I hope you're doing well 
from wherever it is you're joining us. In this class, we will introduce two crucial short-
term interest rates from cash markets. These interest rates affect households through 
the cost of mortgages and credit card loans. These rates also affect businesses through 
the costs of business loans. We will start with the London Interbank Offered Rate, 
LIBOR. We will then look at an alternative interest rate, the Secured Overnight 
Financing Rate, SOFR. We will discuss which markets these rates come from and how 
they are calculated.  
 

 Central Banks and Monetary Policy 
Professor Ralf Meisenzahl 
 
25
 
Let's jump right in. LIBOR is the interest rate from the London interbank market. This is 
a market in which banks can borrow and lend amongst each other. Most loans are 
made in US dollars, but banks can borrow other currencies. When these are US dollar 
loans in Europe, they are also called Euro dollar loans.  
 
 
Loans in this market are unsecured, that is, no collateral is required. Because no 
collateral is required for these interbank loans, they are subject to credit risk. It is 

 Central Banks and Monetary Policy 
Professor Ralf Meisenzahl 
 
26
possible that a bank does not repay its loan. Seven different loan maturities exist in this 
market. Overnight, one week, one month, two months, three months, six months, and 
12 months.  
 
 
LIBOR is the interest rate in this market. It is the London Interbank Offered Rate. There 
is a different interest rate for each combination of currency and maturity. The calculation 
of LIBOR is somewhat unique. Since not all banks are active in every market every day, 
LIBOR is based on surveys rather than actual transaction. Each day, the largest, 
highest volume banks are pooled. LIBOR is an average interest rate based on these 
survey results. Let's have a look at the overnight US dollar LIBOR in the recent years.  
 

 Central Banks and Monetary Policy 
Professor Ralf Meisenzahl 
 
27
 
What does this pattern remind you of? Think about it for a second. Right. The effective 
federal funds rate. Remember, the effective federal funds rate is the US interbank rate. 
It measures how much US banks pay for unsecured US dollar loans from other banks in 
the US. As you can see in the recent years, LIBOR and the federal funds rate track 
each other. That is, the cost of borrowing US dollars in the US and abroad move 
together very closely. Why is this happening? If LIBOR was lower, banks could profit by 
borrowing dollars in London and lend out that money in the United States. This basic 
arbitrage ensures that LIBOR and the federal funds rate are roughly equal.  
 

 Central Banks and Monetary Policy 
Professor Ralf Meisenzahl 
 
28
 
How does LIBOR connect with the broader economy? Well, since the LIBOR measures 
the cost of funding for banks, it has become the reference rate for many other loans, for 
instance, loans to corporations. These are often floating rate. This means the interest 
rate equals a floating reference rate plus some fixed mark up. Banks can cover their 
costs plus earn profit equal to the mark up. A specific example might help.  
 
The 2019 regulatory filing of Walmart states that, the committed lines of credit maturing 

 Central Banks and Monetary Policy 
Professor Ralf Meisenzahl 
 
29
at various times between May 2020 and May 2024, carry interest rates generally 
ranging between LIBOR plus 10 basis points and LIBOR plus 75 basis points.  
 
 
In total, by the year 2020, LIBOR underpinned over $250 trillion in loans worldwide. 
Now, let's take a closer look at the period from 2000 until 2020. Look hard and you can 
see that on several occasions, the LIBOR spiked and did not follow the federal funds 
rate. Two factors explain this. First, this is unsecured lending. The health of banks can 
matter. If the health of banks in the London market was in doubt, then this could drive a 
wedge between the interbank rates. The second factor has been far more controversial. 
After the 2008 financial crisis, reports alleged manipulation of LIBOR. Remember, 
LIBOR is based on interest rate surveys for the largest banks. These surveys require 
honesty. Evidence emerged that these surveys were in fact manipulated. In total, 
regulators fined banks more than $9 billion for manipulating the LIBOR.  
 

 Central Banks and Monetary Policy 
Professor Ralf Meisenzahl 
 
30
 
To prevent further manipulation, regulators also required that LIBOR is dropped as a 
reference rate on loans. Starting in 2022, a new interest rate would be mandated. This 
rate is called the secured overnight financing rate. It is published daily by the Federal 
Reserve Bank of New York. The SOFR rate is the interest rate on overnight repurchase 
agreements with treasury collateral. SOFR is based on transactions rather than 
surveys. SOFR is a secured rate, so it is viewed as risk free. In contrast, LIBOR is an 
unsecured rate, so it incorporates some credit risk.  
 

 Central Banks and Monetary Policy 
Professor Ralf Meisenzahl 
 
31
 
As of 2020, SOFR is based on a market worth about 1 trillion of daily transactions. 
LIBOR is based less than half of this volume.  
 
 
What have we learned in this lesson? First, LIBOR and the SOFR are the short-term 
interest rates. They represent the funding costs of banks for unsecured and 
collateralized loans respectively. Second, LIBOR is subject to credit risk and was 

 Central Banks and Monetary Policy 
Professor Ralf Meisenzahl 
 
32
manipulated in the past. Third, regulators mandated that SOFR, which is a risk-free 
interest rate, replaces the LIBOR as the reference rate.  
 
 

 Central Banks and Monetary Policy 
Professor Ralf Meisenzahl 
 
33
Lesson 1-2: Long-term Rates  
Lesson 1-2.1. Nominal and Real Interest Rates   
 
Hello, and welcome to this lecture on nominal and real interest rates. I hope you're 
doing well from wherever it is you're joining us. In this class, we will discuss nominal 
interest rates and real interest rates. We will examine the Fisher equation. This equation 
links the inflation rate with these two interest rates. Last, we will look at Treasury 
Inflation Protected securities, or TIPS, as a case study. TIPS are one of the few 
securities paying a real interest rate.  
 

 Central Banks and Monetary Policy 
Professor Ralf Meisenzahl 
 
34
 
What is the difference between a nominal rate of return and a real return on an 
investment? We can understand these concepts with an example. Suppose you have 
$100 in a bank account. Let's assume that this account pays 10% interest annually. 
After one year, you gain $10, and you have a total of $110 in your account. This $10 
that the bank gives you is the nominal return on your $100 investment. This 10% 
interest rate is also called the nominal interest rate. How much is this profit worth in 
terms of real goods you can purchase and consume over the year? This is what we 
mean by a real return on an investment.  
 

 Central Banks and Monetary Policy 
Professor Ralf Meisenzahl 
 
35
 
Consider the following example. This year, you can buy gas for your car at $4 per 
gallon. So today your $100 is worth 25 gallons of gas. Now, assume that inflation, the 
pace at which prices increase throughout the economy, is 5%. Gas prices increase by 
5%. So next year, the price of gas is $4.20. And purchasing the same 25 gallons of gas 
will cost you $105.  
 
So, what is the return on our investment? Well, the nominal return is $10. The bank still 

 Central Banks and Monetary Policy 
Professor Ralf Meisenzahl 
 
36
gives you $10 for your savings. However, gas prices have gone up. This means that 
after buying your 25 gallons of gas, you have $5 left over. The real return, which 
accounts for inflation, is therefore $5. The nominal return of $10 minus the price inflation 
of $5 gives you a $5 real return.  
 
 
This example shows that nominal and real interest rates are linked by inflation. In 
general, the real interest rate approximately equals the nominal interest rate minus 
inflation. This is often written with the nominal interest rate i, is roughly equal to the real 
interest rate r plus inflation π. This is called the Fisher Equation. It is named after the 
American economist Irving Fisher.  
 

 Central Banks and Monetary Policy 
Professor Ralf Meisenzahl 
 
37
 
Let's look at a specific case study, Treasury Inflation Protected Securities, or TIPS. This 
is a bond investment that takes inflation explicitly into account. How does this work? 
With TIPS the principal value of the bond increases with the inflation rate. Since the 
interest paid on a bond is a percentage of the principal value, the interest paid on TIPS 
increases with inflation. So, the interest rate on TIPS is a real interest rate.  
 
 
Let's look at a specific example. Suppose you buy a TIPS bond that pays five percent 

 Central Banks and Monetary Policy 
Professor Ralf Meisenzahl 
 
38
interest per $100 of bond. This $100 is the principal value of the bond. Let's say inflation 
runs at two percent this year. Next year, the principal of the TIPS bond will increase by 
two percent to $102. So, you bought $100 of bond, then this would increase to $102. 
What is the return on the bond over the year? The total nominal return is the five 
percent interest plus two percent principal appreciation, so seven percent in total.  
 
 
What about the real return? Remember the Fisher equation, the real return equals the 
nominal return minus inflation. Well, the two-percent principal appreciation offsets the 
two-percent inflation. So, the real return is five percent. TIPS are designed to give a 
constant real return.  
 

 Central Banks and Monetary Policy 
Professor Ralf Meisenzahl 
 
39
 
Why do economists pay close attention to the market for TIPS? When we make 
investments today, we do not know what future inflation will be. As we have seen, 
inflation matters for real returns. It turns out that we can use the price of TIPS bonds to 
recover the market's expectations of future inflation.  
 
 
How does this work? Remember, TIPS provide a constant real return. They provide 
inflation protection. If expected inflation is high, then inflation protection is worth a lot. 

 Central Banks and Monetary Policy 
Professor Ralf Meisenzahl 
 
40
Since TIPS bonds provide inflation protection, the current market price of TIPS will go 
up. Higher prices mean lower yields on TIPS.  
 
 
On the other hand, if inflation is expected to be low, then inflation protection is less 
valuable. In this case, the price of TIPS bonds fall, and the yield on TIPS bonds goes 
up. Thus, TIPS prices or yields capture inflation expectations. In fact, we can compare 
yields on TIPS versus regular treasury bonds to measure expected future inflation.  
 

 Central Banks and Monetary Policy 
Professor Ralf Meisenzahl 
 
41
 
Let's look at some recent data. Here is the yield on the 5-year TIPS bond over time, 
versus the 5-year treasury note. At times, there is a difference in yields between the 
two. A larger difference in yields means investors are willing to pay for inflation 
protection. This means that investors expect high future inflation here, 5 years into the 
future. As you can see, yields on TIPS were elevated in 2009. Investors expected 
higher inflation at this time. The opposite was true in early 2013 as well as in 2021, 
investors expected low future inflation. Of course, the market might turn out to be wrong 
in the end, but this was the expectation embedded in TIPS prices.  
 

 Central Banks and Monetary Policy 
Professor Ralf Meisenzahl 
 
42
 
What have we learned in this lesson? First, nominal interest rates do not account for 
changes in the price of goods. Second, the nominal interest rate is equal to the real 
interest rate inflation. This is the Fisher equation. Third, TIPS bonds capture inflation 
expectations.  
 
 

 Central Banks and Monetary Policy 
Professor Ralf Meisenzahl 
 
43
Lesson 1-2.2. Treasury Securities and The Risk-Free Rate    
 
Hello and welcome to this lecture on Treasury Securities. I hope you're doing well from 
wherever it is you're joining us. In this class, we will discuss the prominent type of risk-
free assets, the US Treasury Securities. These are bonds sold by the US Treasury. We 
will characterize the US Treasury Market. We will examine the distinct features of US 
Treasuries. We will understand the role treasuries play in global financial markets.  
 
 

 Central Banks and Monetary Policy 
Professor Ralf Meisenzahl 
 
44
As of 2020, the Treasury Securities Market is the largest debt market in the world. At 
this time, there were outstanding securities worth over $24 trillion. Almost every type of 
US financial institution owns treasury securities. For instance, banks, mutual funds, 
insurance companies, pension funds, and of course the Federal Reserve. On top of 
that, about one-third of treasuries are owned by international investors.  
 
Let's start by looking at the different categories of US Treasuries. US Treasuries are 
government bonds that pay fixed interest payments over their lifetime. There are three 
different categories of treasuries according to their maturities. First, we have Treasury 
Bills or T-Bills. T-Bills have the shortest range of maturities. They go from four weeks 
through 52 weeks. They account for about 20% of US Treasury Securities. Second, 
there are Treasury Notes. Notes are securities in the middle range of maturities. They 
are issued with maturity terms between two to10 years. They account for most of US 
Treasury securities outstanding. Third, we have Treasury bonds. Treasury bonds are 
essentially identical to Treasury notes except that they mature in 20 to 30 years. 
Treasury bonds are also referred to as the long bond.  
 

 Central Banks and Monetary Policy 
Professor Ralf Meisenzahl 
 
45
 
Why are US treasuries so popular with investors? The main reason is that US treasuries 
are considered to be free of credit risk. This means investors are guaranteed payment 
of both the interest and their principle as long as they hold the US treasuries to maturity. 
These payments are guaranteed by the full faith and credit of the US government. 
Because US treasuries bear no credit risk, they are often used as collateral in borrowing 
arrangements. For example, US treasuries are often used as collateral in the multi-
trillion-dollar market for repurchase agreements or repo market. This is a crucial short-
term funding market for financial institutions. Finally, the interest rate on Treasury 
securities is considered a good measure of the risk-free interest rate. The risk-free 
interest rate is used as a benchmark interest rate in many financial contracts around the 
world.  
 

 Central Banks and Monetary Policy 
Professor Ralf Meisenzahl 
 
46
 
You may wonder why US treasuries are preferred to government debt from other 
developed countries with no risk of default. For instance, Germany, China, or Japan. 
There are three main reasons. First, the US Treasury market is much bigger than any 
other market. At any time, a broad variety of investors are usually interested in buying 
treasuries. This means it is always easy to sell them with few transaction costs. When 
securities in a market can be easily traded with little cost, the market is called liquid. The 
US Treasury market is the most liquid securities market in the world. Second, most 
financial transactions worldwide are conducted in US dollars. Holding US treasuries is 
one way to hold US dollars. For this reason, US treasuries are often called cash-like 
assets. By the end of 2020, corporations and households deposited over two trillion of 
cash in money market mutual funds that only invest in US Treasury securities. Third, US 
treasuries is the most common way for central banks around the world to keep dollar 
reserves.  
 

 Central Banks and Monetary Policy 
Professor Ralf Meisenzahl 
 
47
 
Is investing in US treasuries always riskless? If you hold the treasury until maturity, then 
you receive your payment. There's no risk in this case. However, if you must sell before 
maturity, you might take a loss. This will happen if you must sell for less than your initial 
investment. This can happen when the current market value of the bond falls. Treasury 
investors are worried about two main sources of risk. First, inflation. Second, changes in 
the interest rate. Let's consider each of these risks in turn. We will see how these risks 
can make treasuries lose value. Let's start with inflation.  
 

 Central Banks and Monetary Policy 
Professor Ralf Meisenzahl 
 
48
 
How does inflation affect the price of US Treasury? Suppose you bought a 52-week T-
bill with a face value of $100, that has a two-percent nominal interest rate. Also, let's 
assume you expect inflation of two percent. At maturity, you get a face value of $100 
plus $2 interest. At the same time, goods that had cost $100 when you bought the bill, 
now cost $102 due to inflation. With the earned interest, you can still buy the same 
goods that you could have bought when you bought the T-bill. Now assume that this 
year inflation is higher, say five percent. At maturity, you still get the face value of $100 
plus $2 interest. However, now the goods cost $105 due to the higher inflation rate. This 
means you cannot afford the same goods as before.  
 

 Central Banks and Monetary Policy 
Professor Ralf Meisenzahl 
 
49
 
Your nominal return was two percent, but now your real return, which adjusts for 
inflation, is minus three percent. When inflation is higher than expected, the market 
value of treasuries will decline. From today's perspective, they provide less purchasing 
power, and therefore are worth less.  
 
 
Changes in the interest rates can have a similar effect. Suppose you bought a 2-year 
treasury note that pays two-percent interest for $100 dollars. Let's assume that after one 

 Central Banks and Monetary Policy 
Professor Ralf Meisenzahl 
 
50
year you want to sell this investment. At the same time, your investment has a one-year 
maturity left. How much money can you get for this note? Well, it depends on the 
interest rate of the closest substitute, a newly issued 52-week T-bill. If the interest rate 
on the newly issued 52-week T-bill is higher, say three percent, then this is more 
attractive as an investment than your note that pays only two percent. If the new T-bill 
costs $100, then the price for your investment will be less than $100. When interest 
rates increase, the market value of previously issued long-term treasuries can decline. 
Longer run treasuries bear more risk that interest rates will change over the life of the 
bond. Compensation for this risk is called the term premium.  
 
 
These risks are reflected in nominal interest rates on longer term treasuries. There are 
three components. First, the real interest rate. That is the interest rate after taking 
inflation into account. Second, the expected rate of inflation. Third, the term premium, 
which captures longer run risks, including interest rate changes.  
 

 Central Banks and Monetary Policy 
Professor Ralf Meisenzahl 
 
51
 
What have we learned in this lesson? First, the US Treasury market is the largest and 
most liquid debt market in the world. Second, US treasuries have no credit risk. This 
means their interest rate is a good proxy for a risk-free rate. Third, long run nominal 
interest rates on US Treasury Securities can be decomposed into the real interest rate, 
expected inflation, and the term premium.  
 
 

 Central Banks and Monetary Policy 
Professor Ralf Meisenzahl 
 
52
Lesson 1-2.3. Term Structure of Interest Rates  
 
Hello and welcome to this lecture on the term structure of interest rates. In this class, we 
will discuss what the term structure of interest rates is. We will examine why the term 
structure of interest rates provides important information about the macro-economy. 
Specifically, we will look at how the term structure behaves before recessions. 
 
 
The term structure of interest rates refers to the comparison of interest rates of 

 Central Banks and Monetary Policy 
Professor Ralf Meisenzahl 
 
53
securities by the same issuer of different maturity at a given day. For the term structure, 
we do not use coupon interest rates, the interest rates paid to bond owners, but the 
yields which takes the prices of bonds into account.  
 
 
For example, a bond with a par value of $100 pays five percent interest on its principle. 
If you buy the bond for $99, you still receive $5 interest payment. Your current yield is 5 
divided by 99 or 5.051%. Conversely, if you buy the same 5% interest paying bond for 
$101, then your yield will be 5 divided by 101 or 4.95%. The more general insight here 
is that bond yields and bond prices move in opposite directions. When bond prices 
increase, yields fall. When bond prices decrease, yields increase. We can observe daily 
changes in yields and therefore the term structure of interest rates, which is also 
commonly referred to as the yield curve. The most important yield curve is based on US 
Treasury Securities. There are three reasons why US Treasury Securities provide good 
measures of yields. First, they have no credit risk that could change over time. Second, 
they are issued at many different maturities. Third, they have little trading costs that 
would otherwise distort security prices and therefore yields. We cover more details on 
US Treasury Securities in a different lecture.  
 

 Central Banks and Monetary Policy 
Professor Ralf Meisenzahl 
 
54
 
Now let's have a look at an actual yield curve derived from US Treasury Securities. This 
yield curve is from June 1st, 2021. As you can see, the yields on short maturity bonds is 
almost zero. Even a US node with one year maturity yields only 0.04% annually. 
However, a node with a maturity of 10 years yields 1.62% annually. How do you explain 
this difference between the yields on shorter and longer maturities? Consider two 
alternatives to finance a project that will take 10 years before you can repay the 
principal.  
 

 Central Banks and Monetary Policy 
Professor Ralf Meisenzahl 
 
55
 
The first alternative is to issue a bond with a 10-year maturity. The second alternative is 
to issue a bond with a one-year maturity and roll over the debt after one year with a new 
bond with a one-year maturity. Of course, in this case you need to roll over your debt 
nine times.  
 
 
Now, suppose you would be able to roll over the debt with one-year bonds always 
yielding the same as the first time. In this case, issuing 10 times one-year bonds would 

 Central Banks and Monetary Policy 
Professor Ralf Meisenzahl 
 
56
cost you in the same as issuing one 10-year bond, and hence, the yields would be the 
same. If they were not the same, you would be better off issuing whichever alternative is 
cheaper.  
 
 
However, in the June 1st, 2021, yield curve, shorter term notes have lower yields. This 
means that market participants expect that the interest rates will rise at some point in 
time over the next 10 years.  
 

 Central Banks and Monetary Policy 
Professor Ralf Meisenzahl 
 
57
 
In our example, at some point when you want to roll over the one-year bond, you will 
have to offer a higher yield compared to the first one-year bond you issued.  
 
 
What drives the expectation of higher interest rates? First, market participants could 
expect that the Federal Reserve is going to increase short term interest rates. This is 
generally expected during economic expansions, and the yield curve is typically sloping 
upward. Second, market participants expect higher inflation. Since interest rates on US 

 Central Banks and Monetary Policy 
Professor Ralf Meisenzahl 
 
58
treasuries are nominal, yields on longer maturity treasury securities must increase to 
offset the increase in inflation, to continue to attract investors. Third, fiscal policies that 
will increase government debt will increase the supply of US treasuries. In this case, 
yields on longer maturity treasury securities must increase for investors to buy the 
additional supply of US Treasury Securities. Now let's have a look at the yield curve on 
September 4th, 2019.  
 
 
You will notice that the yield curve is now downward sloping or inverted at the front end 
of the curve. This means that market participants must expect lower interest rates in the 
future. And when do market participants expect lower interest rates? Right. Before 
recession. Let's look at a commonly used measure of the yield curve. The difference 
between the yields on a 10-year treasury note and a two-year treasury note over the 
last 40 years.  
 

 Central Banks and Monetary Policy 
Professor Ralf Meisenzahl 
 
59
 
You can see that almost all of the time this difference is positive, meaning that the yields 
on the 10-year note is higher than on the two-year treasury note. For most of the time, 
market participants expect interest rates to go up. This is consistent with an economic 
expansion. The gray bars in the figure indicate recessions. Since in recessions demand 
is low, interest rates tend to fall during recessions. Now focus on what happens to the 
yield curve right before the gray bars. It inverts each time before the recessions of the 
1980s, the recession in the early 1990s, before the dot-com bubble in 2000, before the 
2008 financial crisis and before the COVID-19 pandemic. In sum, the Treasury yield 
curve is a strong predictor of subsequent performance of the economy and is therefore 
closely watched by market participants and policymakers.  
 

 Central Banks and Monetary Policy 
Professor Ralf Meisenzahl 
 
60
 
What have we learned in this lecture? First, the term structure of interest rates or yield 
curve compares yields across different maturities. Second, the yield curve is a closely 
watched economic indicator. An upward sloping yield curve indicates that market 
participants are expecting interest rates to rise in the future, which happens during 
economic expansions. An inverted downward sloping yield curve, suggesting a future 
decline in interest rates, typically signals the end of an economic expansion.   
 

 Central Banks and Monetary Policy 
Professor Ralf Meisenzahl 
 
61
Lesson 1-3: Other Funding Markets 
Lesson 1-3.1. Money Market Mutual Funds   
 
Hello and welcome to this lecture on the money market mutual funds. I hope you're 
doing well from wherever it is you're joining us. In this class, we will discuss money 
market mutual funds in detail. These funds play a crucial role in the economy, especially 
providing short-term funding to banks and nonbanks. We will examine why these funds 
are popular with investors. We will see what happens when these funds get into trouble. 
Finally, we will look at the Reserve Primary Fund during the 2008 financial crisis as a 
case study.  
 

 Central Banks and Monetary Policy 
Professor Ralf Meisenzahl 
 
62
 
Let's look at some recent data on money market mutual funds. These are sometimes 
called money market funds or money market accounts. In 2021, money market funds 
managed over 4 trillion in assets. For comparison, the graph also shows total bank 
deposits of firms and households. Bank deposits are generally lower during this time 
frame. However, you can also clearly see the effect of the COVID-19 pandemic, in 
which savings increased sharply.  
 

 Central Banks and Monetary Policy 
Professor Ralf Meisenzahl 
 
63
What are money market funds and why are they so popular? Money market funds are a 
type of mutual fund. They are a savings vehicle for businesses and households. They 
were originally created in the United States in the 1970s. They were created because of 
a bank regulation that limited the interest rates that could be paid on bank deposits. This 
bank regulation was called Regulation Q. Under Regulation Q, the maximum interest 
rate banks could pay customers was kept at 5.25%. That may sound like a lot today, but 
in the 1970s and 1980s, inflation and market interest rates were much higher than 5% 
This made bank savings accounts unattractive. Money market funds, not being subject 
to the regulation, could pay higher interest rates.  
 

 Central Banks and Monetary Policy 
Professor Ralf Meisenzahl 
 
64
 
Now let's describe the business model of a money market fund. Let's first look at the 
investment profile. Money market funds invest in super safe short-term debt securities. 
These investments have minimal credit risk. Here's a graph showing US money market 
fund investments in 2021. As you can see, a large share of money market fund 
investments is US Treasury Securities. The second largest investment is into 
repurchase agreements that use U.S. Treasuries as collateral.  
 

 Central Banks and Monetary Policy 
Professor Ralf Meisenzahl 
 
65
That previous chart included all money market funds. However, some funds specialize 
in certain investments. Money market funds that solely invest in U.S. Treasuries are 
called Treasury funds. Those that also invest in other government securities are called 
government funds. These are arguably the safest investments, but they also have the 
lowest return. In contrast, prime funds are money market funds that also invest in other 
short-term debt securities. Prime funds buy commercial paper issued by corporations, 
certificates of deposit issued by banks, and purchase agreements often issued by 
hedge funds. These investments are little riskier, but they also have a slightly higher 
return. 
 

 Central Banks and Monetary Policy 
Professor Ralf Meisenzahl 
 
66
 
Money market funds are a type of mutual fund. When you deposit your cash into a 
money market account, you are buying shares in a mutual fund. Unlike other investment 
funds, money market funds make super safe investments and try to avoid any losses.  
 
 
An investor who buys a money market fund share today at $1 expects to be able to 
redeem the share tomorrow for $1 plus interest. Money market fund shares are 

 Central Banks and Monetary Policy 
Professor Ralf Meisenzahl 
 
67
redeemable on demand. You can withdraw your money at any time you want. These 
features make money market fund investments seem very similar to bank deposits.  
 
 
However, there are two crucial differences between money market funds and bank 
deposits. First, the interest rate paid is different. Money market funds nearly always pay 
a higher interest rate. Consider a corporation managing cash for payroll. For 
corporations with large payrolls, small differences in the interest rates can mean a lot of 
money.  
 

 Central Banks and Monetary Policy 
Professor Ralf Meisenzahl 
 
68
 
The second difference is deposit insurance. If a bank fails, government deposit 
insurance guarantees that depositors get all their money back. This happens when a 
bank fails. Money market fund investments are not insured by the government. There is 
a small risk of losses, especially for prime funds. Money market funds are central to the 
financial system. They are the cornerstones of the short-term funding markets. They 
lend out large amounts of cash to a wide range of financial institutions and businesses. 
This funding is hard to replace on short notice. Sometimes money market funds get into 
trouble. This happens rarely, but it can be very disruptive for financial markets and the 
broader economy. Let's consider the case study of the Reserve Primary Fund during the 
2008 financial crisis.  
 

 Central Banks and Monetary Policy 
Professor Ralf Meisenzahl 
 
69
 
As of 2008, the Reserve Primary Fund was one of the oldest and largest money market 
funds in the United States.  
 
 
This fund was heavily invested in commercial paper of an investment bank called 
Lehman Brothers. Lehman failed during the 2008 financial crisis. Once this news broke, 
panicked investors scrambled to withdraw their money from the fund. Eventually, the 
fund could not meet all redemption at $1 per investment share. It went into bankruptcy.  

 Central Banks and Monetary Policy 
Professor Ralf Meisenzahl 
 
70
 
 
In the end, the Reserve Primary Fund was only able to return $0.97 per $1 share. This 
event is referred to as breaking the buck. Recall that there is no deposit insurance for 
money market mutual funds. When the fund breaks the buck, investors lose money. 
 
 
This event caused a chain reaction in financial markets. After the Reserve Primary Fund 
failed, investors became concerned about the health of other prime funds. Safe 

 Central Banks and Monetary Policy 
Professor Ralf Meisenzahl 
 
71
investments suddenly seemed risky. They withdrew about 400 billion from this fund. 
This was a sharp reduction in cash in the money markets. Money market funds were 
forced to pull back from short term funding markets. Firms and financial institutions that 
usually borrowed in these markets scrambled for cash or sold assets. And, in the case 
of banks, they reduced their own supply of credit to businesses and households. The 
failure of the Reserve Primary Fund showcases how central money market funds are for 
the financial system. When these funds experienced distress and mass redemptions, 
this can be very problematic. After the financial crisis, financial market regulators 
implemented reforms to avoid future disruptions at the money market mutual funds.  
 
 
So, let's wrap up. What have we learned in this lesson? First, money market mutual 
funds are the largest short-term or cash lenders in the U.S. financial system. These 
funds help to efficiently allocate cash throughout the economy. Second, investor’s view 
money market mutual funds as a substitute for bank deposits. However, these 
investments are not insured like bank deposits. Third, disruptions at these funds can 
affect large parts of the financial system through a reduction in short-term credit.  
 
 

 Central Banks and Monetary Policy 
Professor Ralf Meisenzahl 
 
72
Lesson 1-3.2. Securitization  
 
Hello and welcome to this lecture on securitization. I hope you're doing well from 
wherever it is you're joining us. In this class, we will introduce the idea of securitization. 
This is an important financial innovation that gained prominence in the 1970s. We will 
see how important securitization is for the US economy. Last, we will see how 
securitization depends on short term funding markets. Let's first have a look at how 
securitization works. We will understand the process and why it is profitable. The 
process is worth understanding, so I can recommend watching this part a couple of 
times.  
 

 Central Banks and Monetary Policy 
Professor Ralf Meisenzahl 
 
73
 
Consider one mortgage loan to one customer. Based on the customer's risk profile, 
suppose we expect the customer to default with a probability of 2%. With only one loan 
and one customer, you face one of two outcomes, the borrower either repays the loan 
or defaults. The losses of these loans are highly uncertain, it's all or nothing.  
 
 
Now consider a pool of 100 of these mortgages. Let's again assume that each customer 
has a probability of default of 2%. Let's assume these borrowers all live in different parts 

 Central Banks and Monetary Policy 
Professor Ralf Meisenzahl 
 
74
of the country. This means that they are unlikely to all default at the same time. What is 
the risk of default in this pool of 100 loans? You expect two out of 100 to not repay. With 
100 loans, you may find that one does not repay or three do not repay. But what is 
important here is that it isn't all or nothing. With 100 mortgages, there's less uncertainty 
than in the one loan example. Now consider a pool with 10,000 of these mortgages, 
with the probability of 2% of default, you expect 200 defaults. This time, your 
expectation is likely to be fairly accurate.  
 
 
There may be 190 or 210 defaults, but this is 1.9 or 2.1%. This is very close to your 
expectation. What is the key takeaway? We want a large, well-diversified pool of 
mortgages. Then we can accurately estimate the cash flow. These are the losses and 
repayments on the loans. Being able to precisely forecast cash flow of pools of loans 
makes securitization work.  
 

 Central Banks and Monetary Policy 
Professor Ralf Meisenzahl 
 
75
 
Now let's introduce the second piece of the puzzle. In a securitization, an issuer sells 
securities backed by the loan pool. This usually consists of bonds and equity. These 
securities are used to fund the mortgages. With a good estimate of the cash flow, we 
can issue a significant amount of bonds. The coupon payments on these bonds come 
from the mortgage, interest payments from the pool. The securities are designed so that 
the bondholders get paid first. These bonds have the first claim on the cash flow 
generated by the loan pool. This makes the bonds relatively safe. The equity securities 
also receive cash flow from the mortgage pool.  
 

 Central Banks and Monetary Policy 
Professor Ralf Meisenzahl 
 
76
 
However, they are paid second. The owners of the equity portion get the remaining 
cash flow after all bondholders have been paid.  
 
 
Why is securitization profitable? Let's look at a concrete example. Suppose you have a 
pool of mortgages worth 100. Let's say these mortgages pay 5% interest. We issued 
$80 of bonds and keep the $20 of equity for ourselves. These $100 of securities fund 
$100 of mortgages. Since the bondholders get paid first, they are relatively safe. Let's 

 Central Banks and Monetary Policy 
Professor Ralf Meisenzahl 
 
77
say we promise 4% interest on the bonds, then we get paid whatever is left over at the 
end. If no mortgages default, then the pool generates $5 of cash.  
 
 
The $80 of bonds get a 4% return. That $3.20. In equity holders get the remaining 
$1.80. 
 

 Central Banks and Monetary Policy 
Professor Ralf Meisenzahl 
 
78
 
If 2% of the mortgages default, then the pool generates $4.90 The bondholders are fine, 
since they have priority, so the equity holders get $0.10 less.  
 
 
With unexpectedly high defaults, the equity holders could get nothing. The equity 
holders usually make a nicer return on their investment; however, they also bear the 
risk.  
 

 Central Banks and Monetary Policy 
Professor Ralf Meisenzahl 
 
79
 
This example illustrates the basics of securitization. It is arguably the most important 
financial innovation of the 20th century. It also shows how securitization works as a 
funding model. With the precise estimate of the cash flow in the securitization pool, you 
can use bonds to fund the loans. The lender does not need to have the cash to grant all 
the loans, instead they can borrow it from the market. Since the 1970s, the possibility to 
raise funding for loans on the securitization market has increased the supply of credit to 
firms and households in the United States.  
 

 Central Banks and Monetary Policy 
Professor Ralf Meisenzahl 
 
80
 
Let's look at some data on securitization in the United States. In the US, a large amount 
of loans to households and businesses are securitized. This has increased dramatically 
since the 1980s. There was a large drop off after the 2008 financial crisis. Despite this, 
by 2021, the total amount of bonds that were related to securitization was about $12 
trillion. Most of these bonds, more than $10 trillion were issued by government 
sponsored enterprises and guaranteed by the US government. These bonds are as safe 
as US Treasury Securities. The rest came from securitization of private issuers such as 
banks and finance companies.  
 

 Central Banks and Monetary Policy 
Professor Ralf Meisenzahl 
 
81
 
The vast majority of securitized loans are mortgages.These include residential 
mortgages for your single-family home, we can also see mortgages for multifamily 
homes and apartment buildings, commercial mortgages for office buildings or shopping 
malls. The other loan category includes order loans and small business loans.  
 
 
One final point before we wrap up. Securitization can be sensitive to conditions in short 
term funding markets. Why is this the case? Well, many issuers finance loans on a 

 Central Banks and Monetary Policy 
Professor Ralf Meisenzahl 
 
82
short-term basis before they can be pooled and securitized. For example, they raise 
cash by selling commercial paper to money market mutual funds. Then they use the 
cash to grant loans. Once they have granted enough loans, they securitized the pool 
and then the issuer repays the commercial paper with the funds raised from bond 
investors. This is one reason why disruptions in short term funding markets can affect 
the wider economy. When short term funding tries up, the securitization model breaks 
down. When this happens, such as during the 2008 financial crisis, firms and 
households can struggle to access credit.  
 
 
What have we learned in this session? First, securitization is an important funding 
model that emerged in the 20th century. It is based on statistical models, relying on 
many loans to reduce uncertainty. It involves pooling loans and issuing securities that 
are backed by the loan pool. Second, we saw how the securitization funding model has 
increased the total supply of credit in the United States. Third, there are potential 
downsides. We discussed how securitization can be sensitive to conditions in short term 
funding markets.  
 
