 Central Banks and Monetary Policy 
Professor Ralf Meisenzahl 
 
1 
 
Module 2: The Federal Reserve  
Table of Contents 
Module 2: The Federal Reserve .............................................................................................. 1 
Lesson 2-0.1: Overview ......................................................................................................................................... 2 
Lesson 2-1: The Federal Reserve .....................................................................................................7 
Lesson 2-1.1. History and Structure of the Federal Reserve ................................................................................. 7 
Lesson 2-1.2. Purpose and Functions of the Federal Reserve ............................................................................ 19 
Lesson 2-2: Traditional Monetary Policy ........................................................................................ 28 
Lesson 2-2.1. Money Supply and Monetary Policy ............................................................................................. 28 
Lesson 2-2.2. The Federal Reserve's Balance Sheet ............................................................................................ 36 
Lesson 2-2.3. Open Market Operations .............................................................................................................. 44 
Lesson 2-2.4. The Discount Window ................................................................................................................... 52 
Lesson 2-3: Non-traditional Monetary Policy ................................................................................. 60 
Lesson 2-3.1. Forward Guidance ......................................................................................................................... 60 
Lesson 2-3.2. Large-Scale Asset Purchases ......................................................................................................... 72 
Lesson 2-3.3. Monetary Policy With Abundant Bank Reserves .......................................................................... 79 
 

 Central Banks and Monetary Policy 
Professor Ralf Meisenzahl 
 
2 
Lesson 2-0 Module 2 Information  
Lesson 2-0.1: Overview  
 
Hello and welcome. I hope you're doing well from wherever it is you're joining us.  
 
 
In this module, we study the Federal Reserve System, its functions, and its monetary 
policy tools. We start with the history of the Federal Reserve. Why do we have a central 

 Central Banks and Monetary Policy 
Professor Ralf Meisenzahl 
 
3 
bank? How is it organized? What purpose does it serve? We will take a careful look at 
two goals of monetary policy: maximum employment and stable prices. This is often 
called the Dual Mandate of the Federal Reserve. For all our discussion for the 
remainder of this course should somehow relate back to the Dual Mandate. We will then 
examine the institutional features of the Federal Reserve and see how its monetary 
policy decision-making process works. To be clear, this course examines the Federal 
Reserve System of the United States as a case study. There are, of course, many other 
central banks around the world. Some central banks have a different mandate or a 
slightly different set of key functions. However, all of them conduct monetary policy and 
provide a payment system. In this course, we focus mostly on how central banks 
conduct monetary policy. Over time, there has been much disagreement about the best 
ways to conduct monetary policy. Some central banks explicitly target the money supply 
rather than interest rates. The Federal Reserve used to do this.  
 
 
Why do we care about money supply? Like any other good, the price of money is 
determined by demand for money and supply of money in the economy. What's perhaps 
unusual is that the price of money is the interest rate. Rather than targeting interest 
rates directly, it might make sense to control the money supply instead. But that begs 
the question, how can we measure the money supply? We will therefore introduce the 
concept of money supply, its measurement, and how it can be affected by monetary 
policy. We then examine the balance sheet of the Federal Reserve and how it has 
evolved over time. We will provide some insights about how the conduct of monetary 
policy has changed money supply.  
 

 Central Banks and Monetary Policy 
Professor Ralf Meisenzahl 
 
4 
 
To understand how exactly money supply and interest rates are related, we will focus 
on traditional monetary policy. We will discuss how open market operations directly 
affect the money supply in the federal funds market. We will see how these open market 
operations determine the equilibrium interest rate in this market. The Federal funds rate. 
The Federal funds rate is the main target interest rate of monetary policy in the US. A 
complimentary traditional monetary policy tool is the discount window. This policy tool 
provides short-term liquidity in form of short-term loans to banks. This tool is mainly 
designed for emergency uses so the interest rate is set higher than the Federal funds 
rate. But the discount window loans remain an alternative to Federal funds. The interest 
rate on the discount window loans, therefore, enforces the upper limit of the Federal 
funds rate target range set by the Federal Reserve.  
 

 Central Banks and Monetary Policy 
Professor Ralf Meisenzahl 
 
5 
 
The last part of this module looks at new monetary policy tools that have emerged after 
the 2008 global financial crisis. These are often called unconventional monetary policy 
tools. The first is forward guidance. Forward guidance gives market participants a clear 
path for interest rates, or more generally, monetary policy actions in the future and can 
be used to target long-term interest rates. The second new tool are large-scale asset 
purchases. When the short-term interest rate is already zero, central banks can further 
increase the money supply by buying large amounts of government-backed debt such 
as Treasury securities and agency mortgage-backed securities. This approach allows 
the Central Bank to bring down long-term interest rates directly. The third new tool is the 
overnight reverse repurchase program or ON RRP. This tool is used to set interest rates 
in the repo market. The repo market is like the federal funds market and overnight 
lending market. Financial institutions could switch between these markets. They are 
substitutes. By managing the equilibrium in the repo market, the Federal Reserve 
ensures that all short-term interest rates are consistent with their monetary policy 
targets.  
 
To conclude, this module provides an in-depth discussion of monetary policy tool. Many 
of these videos will require an understanding of the financial markets and instruments 
discussed in the first module. Specifically, the federal funds market, the repo market, 
Treasury securities, and the yield curve. You don't need to understand all the technical 
details of each monetary policy tool. However, I do want you to keep these two main 
high-level points in mind. First, the Federal Reserve targets multiple closely linked 
markets with its interest rate policy. Second, when the short-term interest rate is zero, 

 Central Banks and Monetary Policy 
Professor Ralf Meisenzahl 
 
6 
the central bank is not out of options. It can use forward guidance and large-scale asset 
purchases to target longer-term interest rates.  
 
 

 Central Banks and Monetary Policy 
Professor Ralf Meisenzahl 
 
7 
 Lesson 2-1: The Federal Reserve  
Lesson 2-1.1. History and Structure of the Federal Reserve  
 
Hello and welcome to this lecture on the history and structure of the Federal Reserve 
System. In this class, we will introduce the concept of a central bank. Central banks 
exist all around the world. We will discuss the reasons why they were founded, what are 
their objectives and key functions. We will then focus on the Federal Reserve System, 
the Central Bank of the United States. We will discuss its foundation, we will examine 
the structure of the Federal Reserve system, and its decision-making bodies.  
 

 Central Banks and Monetary Policy 
Professor Ralf Meisenzahl 
 
8 
 
Let's start by looking at the world's oldest central bank. This is the Swedish Riksbank, 
which is based in Stockholm, Sweden. It is a fun case study that helps us to understand 
why country's founded central banks. It tells us what they hope to achieve.  
 
 
We are in Sweden in 1661. At the time, money took the form of heavy coins made from 
precious metals. These coins could weigh as much as 45 pounds, not very convenient. 
In 1661, the Swedish king allowed private banks to print paper bank notes. This is what 

 Central Banks and Monetary Policy 
Professor Ralf Meisenzahl 
 
9 
we all know today as paper money. This is much more convenient for banks and 
citizens. Why were people willing to accept these banknotes? Well, because the bank 
promised to exchange its banknotes against coins deposited in the bank.  
 
 
The bank notes were redeemable on demand. The banknotes were a huge success, but 
then the bank printed more and more banknotes. This led people to question whether 
the private bank would have enough coins deposited in its vaults to exchange all 
banknotes. These doubts led to an increasing number of people redeeming their 
banknotes for coins. This is an example of a bank run. However, the bank did not have 
enough coins to redeem its banknotes all at once. As a result, the bank collapsed.  
 

 Central Banks and Monetary Policy 
Professor Ralf Meisenzahl 
 
10
 
Despite this bank run, the idea of paper money was still popular. But it was understood 
that there was too much paper money in circulation relative to deposited coins. There 
was too much money relative to the amount of collateral held by the banking system. 
Hence, the Swedish Riksbank was founded in 1668 to control the money supply. The 
law required this new central bank to maintain the domestic coinage at its right and fair 
value. The law prohibited the Riksbank to print paper money at volumes that would 
cause inflation.  
 

 Central Banks and Monetary Policy 
Professor Ralf Meisenzahl 
 
11
 
The story of the foundation of the Swedish Riksbank showcases two important issues 
that modern central banks are designed to address. The first is ensuring price stability. 
Central banks are typically given control over the money supply. This control allows 
central banks to prevent too much paper money being printed. When there is too much 
money in the economy, this tends to cause price inflation. The second reason is that 
banks are susceptible to runs by fearful customers. To deal with bank runs, central 
banks act as a lender of last resort. Let me explain what this means. Banks borrow 
short term and lend long term. In our example, the Swedish bank borrowed metal coins 
in exchange for banknotes. It then used the coins in part to give out loans. At any point, 
there were fewer coins in the vault than banknotes outstanding. When everybody 
wanted their coins for their banknotes, the bank lacks the coins and could collapse. In 
modern banking, banks borrow cash from depositors and lend it out long term. They 
could also face a shortage of cash from time to time, even if they are making profitable 
loans to good borrowers.  
 

 Central Banks and Monetary Policy 
Professor Ralf Meisenzahl 
 
12
 
The lender of last resort function of central banks is designed to prevent the collapse of 
a healthy bank due to a shortage of cash. How does this work in practice? The Central 
Bank provides cash to the banks in form of short-term loans against collateral. This can 
happen during an emergency when the bank is stressed. Central banks typically accept 
many different types of collateral. Importantly, this can be illiquid long-term loans, that 
is, assets that would be hard to sell or that can only be sold with large discounts. For 
instance, today the Federal Reserve system accepts real estate and consumer loans as 
collateral for cash loans to banks.  
 

 Central Banks and Monetary Policy 
Professor Ralf Meisenzahl 
 
13
 
Let's now examine why the Federal Reserve system was founded. The Federal Reserve 
system is not the first US central bank, it is actually the third. There was the First Bank 
of America, from 1791 to 1811 and the Second Bank of America, from 1816 to1836. 
However, these two earlier central banks were very different from what we today would 
consider to be a central bank. For instance, they had no control over the money supply.  
 
The United States had no central bank between1837 and 1913. Money was issued 

 Central Banks and Monetary Policy 
Professor Ralf Meisenzahl 
 
14
privately, just like in our Swedish example. In this period, there were several banking 
crises, including a panic in 1907. During the 1907 panic, the stock market lost 50% of its 
value. Banks nationwide saw customers lining up to withdraw their deposits.  
 
 
The panic of 1907 illustrated the need for a lender of last resort. But it took some time 
and much political debate until the Federal Reserve system was officially established.  
 

 Central Banks and Monetary Policy 
Professor Ralf Meisenzahl 
 
15
On December 24th, 1913, President Woodrow Wilson signed the Federal Reserve Act.  
 
 
What did the Act allow the Federal Reserve System to do? First, it gave the Fed control 
over the money supply. Second, the Fed could act as a lender of last resort to banks. 
The lender of last resort function has been used for interventions during times of 
market-wide stress. This includes the financial crisis of 2008 and the COVID-19 
pandemic.  

 Central Banks and Monetary Policy 
Professor Ralf Meisenzahl 
 
16
 
 
The Federal Reserve Act established three parts of the new central bank, one 
independent federal agency, the Board of Governors in Washington DC, 12 regional 
Federal reserve banks, and the Federal Open Market Committee, or FOMC. The board 
of Governors consists of seven members. The board of governors guides the policies of 
the entire Federal Reserve System.  
 

 Central Banks and Monetary Policy 
Professor Ralf Meisenzahl 
 
17
The 12 Regional Federal Reserve banks are Boston, New York, Philadelphia, 
Cleveland, Richmond, Atlanta, Chicago, St. Louis, Minneapolis, Kansas City, Dallas, 
and San Francisco. The regional Federal Reserve banks were placed across important 
financial centers. This distributes power of the Fed across the United States.  
 
 
The reserve banks implement the Federal Reserve policies and function. For instance, 
they examine and supervise financial institutions, act as lenders of last resort to banks 

 Central Banks and Monetary Policy 
Professor Ralf Meisenzahl 
 
18
in the district. They also provide US payment system services for banks in the district. 
There are 12 members of the Federal Open Market Committee, or FOMC. This always 
includes the seven members of the Board of governors and the president of the Federal 
Reserve Bank of New York. The remaining four members come from a rotating group of 
the remaining Federal Reserve bank presidents. The main task of the FOMC is to set 
interest rate targets. This is commonly referred to monetary policy.  
 
 
What have we learned in this lesson? Before central banks existed, paper money was 
often issued privately. In this system, the money supply was unpredictable and bank 
runs occurred frequently. To control the money supply and to ensure the stability of the 
banking system, central banks were founded. Central banks are also the lender of last 
resort that will lend cash to banks in times of crisis. In the United States the Federal 
Reserve System fulfills these functions through three entities. The Board of governors, 
12 Federal Reserve banks, and the Federal Open Market Committee.  
 
 

 Central Banks and Monetary Policy 
Professor Ralf Meisenzahl 
 
19
Lesson 2-1.2. Purpose and Functions of the Federal Reserve  
 
Hello, and welcome to this lecture on the five key functions of the Federal Reserve 
System. In this class, we will discuss the mandate of the Federal Reserve System. By 
law, the Fed exists to promote the effective operation of the US economy. We will see 
what this means in practice, we will see the five key functions of the Fed. These five key 
functions are, to conduct monetary policy, promote financial system stability, to regulate 
and supervise financial institutions, to provide an efficient payment system, and finally, 
to promote consumer protection and community development. We will discuss these 
functions one by one and see how they connect with the goals of the Fed.  
 

 Central Banks and Monetary Policy 
Professor Ralf Meisenzahl 
 
20
 
Let's get started, the Federal Reserve Act of 1913 created the Federal Reserve System. 
Under the Act, the Fed must conduct monetary policy to foster a productive and stable 
economy. Monetary policy has evolved over time, nowadays it involves controlling short 
term interest rates. By law, the Fed must use monetary policy to effectively promote the 
goals of maximum employment, stable prices, and moderate long-term interest rates. 
These are the goals, but what do they mean? Maximum employment usually refers to a 
situation when most people who are looking for work are gainfully employed. Stable 
prices encourage savings and investment. By contrast, when inflation is high, asset 
returns can be lower, this reduces households’ incentives to save and businesses 
incentives to invest. Similarly, moderate long term-interest rates increase business 
incentives to invest. Under maximum employment, stable prices and reasonable long-
term interest rates, the belief is that there will be stable growth and a thriving economy. 
This is what the Fed hopes to achieve.  
 

 Central Banks and Monetary Policy 
Professor Ralf Meisenzahl 
 
21
 
The second key function is financial stability, what is financial stability? Generally, we 
consider a financial system to be stable when it provides services to households and 
businesses at reasonable cost and without interruption. The financial system consists of 
financial markets and financial institutions such as banks. A stable system channels 
funds from savers to borrowers, this allows for an efficient allocation of capital across 
the economy.  
 

 Central Banks and Monetary Policy 
Professor Ralf Meisenzahl 
 
22
To fulfill this responsibility, the Federal Reserve monitors the financial system. In fact, it 
monitors using two approaches, the first is called the micro-prudential approach. This 
focuses on risks at specific institutions, this could be a bank or an insurance company. 
The micro-prudential approach is related to bank supervision, we will discuss this 
shortly. The second approach is macro-prudential, this instead looks out for risks that 
could impact the entire financial system. The Federal Reserve monitors several 
measures of financial market stress. An example is the amount of borrowing or leverage 
in the financial system, leverage can amplify losses and cause defaults. Another 
example is the amount of short-term borrowing by financial firms. Short-term borrowing 
can cause runs that disrupt the flow of credit to the economy.  
 

 Central Banks and Monetary Policy 
Professor Ralf Meisenzahl 
 
23
 
The third key function of the Federal Reserve is to regulate and supervise financial 
institutions. Regulation and supervision are distinct but complementary activities. 
Regulation relates to the writing of rules, these rules often place restrictions on financial 
institutions. This process starts with legislation in Congress, this gives the Federal 
Reserve the authority to draft rules. With input from the public, the rules are finalized 
and published, financial institutions must then comply with the rules.  
 

 Central Banks and Monetary Policy 
Professor Ralf Meisenzahl 
 
24
The truth in lending act is a good example, under this rule, the Federal Reserve requires 
lenders to clearly disclose lending terms and costs to borrowers. This includes the 
interest rates on a credit card.  
 
 
Supervision, on the other hand, relates to the compliance with the regulation. For this 
purpose, the Federal Reserve employs, and trains bank examiners. Examiners conduct 
visits to regulated financial institutions to ensure compliance with the rules, this involves 

 Central Banks and Monetary Policy 
Professor Ralf Meisenzahl 
 
25
in-depth inspections of the bank's operations. If rules are violated, supervisors can 
impose fines and other penalties such as restrictions on dividend payments. 
Supervision relates to financial stability; it is a micro-prudential approach. Supervision 
ensures the safety and soundness of individual financial institutions.  
 
The fourth key function of the Federal Reserve is to provide an efficient payment 
system. Currently, the Federal Reserve supports a variety of payments, this can be 
currency. The Federal Reserve issues paper money or cash that traditionally was used 
for many household transactions. The Federal Reserve also facilitates check clearing. 
Automated Clearinghouse, or ACH, settles small value bank transfers like wage 
payments to employees or the payment of your utility bill. And also large value 
transactions or wholesale payments among businesses and banks.  
 

 Central Banks and Monetary Policy 
Professor Ralf Meisenzahl 
 
26
 
The fifth key function of the Federal Reserve is promoting consumer protection and 
community development. Improving access to affordable financial products provides 
financial stability for families. To this end, the Federal Reserve implements various 
consumer protection, fair lending, fair housing, and community reinvestment laws. We 
mentioned the Truth in Lending Act earlier, this is about transparency and fairness. The 
Community Reinvestment Act is another important example. Under this rule, the 
Federal Reserve collects data on how much credit flows to communities and 
encourages financial institutions to provide access to credit for the entire communities 
that they serve. This includes lending to low- and moderate-income neighborhoods.  
 

 Central Banks and Monetary Policy 
Professor Ralf Meisenzahl 
 
27
 
In this session, we have provided a big picture review of the purposes and functions of 
the Federal Reserve System. We discussed the five key functions of the Fed, 
conducting monetary policy, financial system stability, regulating and supervising 
financial institutions, providing and efficient payment systems, and finally, promoting 
consumer protection and community development. Taken together, these functions 
support the US economy and more generally, serve the public interests.  
 
 

 Central Banks and Monetary Policy 
Professor Ralf Meisenzahl 
 
28
Lesson 2-2: Traditional Monetary Policy  
Lesson 2-2.1. Money Supply and Monetary Policy  
 
Hello, and welcome to this lecture on the money supply. In this class, we will discuss 
what the money supply is and how it is measured. We will introduce two ideas about the 
money supply. First, the money multiplier, second, the quantity theory of money. These 
ideas connect the money supply with important economic outcomes including inflation. 
If central banks aim to target inflation, then targeting the money supply can make sense. 
We will discuss how central banks control the money supply. Let's get started. Money is 
what we use when we buy and sell things. Broadly speaking, it is a reliable means of 
payment between a buyer and a seller. The money supply is the amount of money in 
circulation. The money supply includes dollar notes and coins, but it can also include 
other items as well.  
 

 Central Banks and Monetary Policy 
Professor Ralf Meisenzahl 
 
29
 
Let's be more precise about how we measure the money supply. The narrowest 
definition is the monetary base. The monetary base includes the amount of currency in 
circulation. It also includes bank reserve balances. These are deposits held by banks in 
their accounts at the Federal Reserves. A somewhat wider definition of money supply is 
M1. M1 starts with the monetary base, we then add on transaction deposits. This 
includes our checking account balances at banks. The idea of M1 is to capture cash, 
and how many loanable funds bank have. These are funds that banks have available to 
lend out.  
 

 Central Banks and Monetary Policy 
Professor Ralf Meisenzahl 
 
30
 
But why are loanable funds so important, and how do they relate to the money supply? 
Consider the following example. Let's say you deposit $100 at your bank; the bank 
keeps 10% or $10 at the Federal Reserve as a reserve. This could be required or 
simply prudence on the part of the bank. It lends out the remaining $90. The $90 will 
appear as a new deposit in the borrower's checking account. Again, the bank keeps 
10% or $9 at the Federal Reserve as a reserve and lends out 81. Now, the 81 will 
appear as a new deposit. This process could continue and on, and it is often called the 
money multiplier. Each time funds are loaned out, bank deposits, and therefore, the 
money supply will increase. In fact, the 10% reserve is what limits the money supply.  
 

 Central Banks and Monetary Policy 
Professor Ralf Meisenzahl 
 
31
 
Let's look at two more measures of money supply. The most common definition is M2. 
This is M1 plus other items that can be converted into cash at a relatively short notice. 
This includes savings deposits, small time deposits under $100,000, and retail money 
market mutual fund shares. The widest definition is M3. This takes M2, and adds large 
time deposits, institutional money market funds, short-term repurchase agreements, and 
larger liquid assets.  
 

 Central Banks and Monetary Policy 
Professor Ralf Meisenzahl 
 
32
 
Historically, measures of the money supply were closely related to key macroeconomic 
outcomes. Past episodes of high inflation coincide with periods when the money supply 
has grown fast. Why? Well, like any other commodity, the value of money declines if 
there is excess money in circulation. The relationship between money supply, inflation, 
and economic growth is called the quantity theory of money. It is one of the oldest ideas 
in economics and was popularized by Milton Friedman of the University of Chicago. 
Why does this relationship matter? Well, central bank’s target stable prices and 
maximum employment. This is their mandate. Historically, measures of the money 
supply were closely related to inflation and economic growth. For this reason, central 
banks have used measures of the money supply when deciding on monetary policy.  
 

 Central Banks and Monetary Policy 
Professor Ralf Meisenzahl 
 
33
 
Let's look at this in the data. This is the US context going back to the 1960s. Here we 
have the M3 money supply. Now we add the consumer price index to measure inflation. 
You can see that M3 money supply tracks inflation reasonably well through some 
divergence after the recession in the 1980s. Similarly, M3 tracks nominal cross 
domestic product well through until 2000.  
 
In principle, the Federal Reserve could control the money supply to achieve its 

 Central Banks and Monetary Policy 
Professor Ralf Meisenzahl 
 
34
mandate. In practice, they could also do this by targeting banks in a couple of ways. 
First, the federal reserve can change the reserve requirement for banks. Recall the 
money multiplier, the higher the reserve requirement is, the more reserves banks must 
hold, and the less loans banks can make. In other words, the Federal Reserve can 
control the money multiplier. Second, the Federal Reserve can conduct open market 
operations. In open market operations, the Fed trades securities with banks, treasuries, 
for example. If the Federal Reserve sells securities to a bank, the bank must pay the 
Fed using loanable funds. As a result, the bank will have fewer funds to make loans, 
which will decrease the money multiplier and the money supplier. Are we done? Not 
quite. Unfortunately, as time went on, the relationship between money supply, inflation, 
and GDP became less reliable in the data. First, there are now new payment 
technologies and ways for households to store cash. This made it harder to measure 
money supply. The federal reserve has stopped circulating M3. 
 
 
Second, the relationship between M3 and inflation or GDP have not been stable since 
the year 2000. Since the financial crisis of 2008, the relationship between M3 and GDP 
has broken down. You can see the clear divergence here. It happened again during the 
COVID-19 pandemic. Most central banks now regard money supply measures as less 
important when making monetary policy decisions.  
 

 Central Banks and Monetary Policy 
Professor Ralf Meisenzahl 
 
35
 
In the session, we have discussed the concept of the money supply and its connection 
with monetary policies. The key takeaways are, first, we can measure the money supply 
several ways. We discussed the monetary base M1, M2 and M3. Second, the money 
multiplier connects bank reserves the money supply. Third, we examined the 
relationship between money supply, inflation, and GDP. Fourth, we saw that monetary 
policy can increase or decrease the money supply. 
 
 

 Central Banks and Monetary Policy 
Professor Ralf Meisenzahl 
 
36
Lesson 2-2.2. The Federal Reserve's Balance Sheet  
 
Hello and welcome to this class on the Federal Reserve balance sheet. The Federal 
Reserve system is the Central Bank of the United States. Like any financial institution, 
the Fed has a balance sheet. Like any balance sheet, there will be assets and there will 
be liabilities. What's different is that the Fed uses its balance sheet to achieve its 
monetary policy goals. For example, when the Fed decides to buy assets and expand 
its balance sheets, it is a monetary policy action. We will take a close look at the 
Federal Reserve balance sheet. We will look at its size. We will examine its 
components. What are the main assets? How are these assets funded? Then we will 
see how the composition of the Fed's balance sheet has changed in the recent years. 
We will see how dramatic monetary policy actions in response to crisis have led to 
these dramatic changes. This will be an important theme of this class. Let's get started. 
Every week, the Federal Reserve publishes a detailed balance sheet. This information 
is made available online and market participants pay close attention.  
 

 Central Banks and Monetary Policy 
Professor Ralf Meisenzahl 
 
37
 
Let's start by looking at the size of the Federal Reserve balance sheet over time. By 
size, I mean the total assets of the Federal Reserve. As you can see, in the early 2000, 
the Federal Reserve held assets worth about $800 billion dollars. With the 2008 
financial crisis, the balance sheet more than doubled. At this time, the Federal Reserve 
conducted some major monetary policy interventions. We will discuss these 
interventions in another class, but you can see right away that they had a traumatic 
effect. By 2009, the Federal Reserve held assets worth a little over two trillion. From 
2009-2014 the balance sheet more than doubled again to over four trillion dollars. 
Finally, during the COVID-19 pandemic, the balance sheet size doubled yet again and 
reached eight trillion by the summer of 2021. What is the key takeaway here? There has 
been an explosive growth in the Federal Reserve balance sheets since 2008. This 
growth reflects monetary policy actions.  
 

 Central Banks and Monetary Policy 
Professor Ralf Meisenzahl 
 
38
 
Now let's look at a breakdown of the most important assets. We will start with the pre-
2008 balance sheet. This will tell us something about the Fed's operation in normal 
times. On Wednesday, January 12, 2000, the Federal Reserve held assets worth about 
630 billion. By far, the largest asset position, accounting for three quarters of all assets, 
is Government securities worth 485 billion. The second largest positions are report 
transactions. This is when the Federal Reserve make cash loans on a short-term basis. 
This is usually part of an open market operation which we will discuss in another class. 
The Federal Reserve also holds currency which includes coin and paper currency and 
gold.  
 

 Central Banks and Monetary Policy 
Professor Ralf Meisenzahl 
 
39
 
Now let's look at the liability side of the balance sheet. Here the largest position is 
currency in circulation. That is, the dollar notes and coins in your pocket worth 590 
billion. Then there are reserve balances of banks with the Federal Reserve. These 
include both required and access reserves. Remember these first two liabilities, 
currency plus reserves are together called the monetary base. The monetary base is a 
liability of the Fed. It is issued by the Fed and backed by assets of the Federal Reserve 
system. The Treasury General Account is the checking account of the US government. 
All US government payments are made from this account. Tax receipts are also 
deposited in this account. The balance sheet on January 12th, 2000, was small 
compared to 20 years later. Indeed, in the early 2000, it was not even a 10th of the size 
of the balance sheet during the COVID-19 pandemic. How did this expansion of the 
balance sheet happen?  
 

 Central Banks and Monetary Policy 
Professor Ralf Meisenzahl 
 
40
 
Let's examine the asset side first. This is the data for January 7th, 2021. There are a 
couple of things to note for the 2021 data. First, the amount of assets held by the 
Federal Reserve was much bigger. The total across all assets is 7.3 trillion. Remember, 
it was only 630 billion before. Second, the list of items has changed, too. Now we see 
mortgage-backed securities and crisis facilities showing up. The largest item is still US 
treasury securities worth over 4.6 trillion. In addition, the Federal Reserve held 
mortgage-backed securities. That is bonds backed by mortgages from government 
sponsored enterprises worth over two trillion. These bonds are guaranteed by the US 
government. Government securities accounted for over 90% of the balance sheet. 
Capital gains are next. These are profits on securities that have not been sold yet. 
These are also called unrealized capital gains. Then we see crisis facilities. These are 
various loan programs. They are mostly to banks and funds were provided during times 
of market wide stress. Banks will have to repay these loans. What is the main driver for 
asset growth? Clearly, it is the government and government-backed securities held by 
the Federal Reserve.  
 

 Central Banks and Monetary Policy 
Professor Ralf Meisenzahl 
 
41
 
How did the Federal Reserve finance this massive balance sheet expansion? A regular 
business or household might have to borrow to expand. However, the FED controls the 
money supply, so it could do this instead.  
 
 
Did the Federal Reserve print more paper money? Let's look at total currency in 
circulation over the same period. As you can see, currency in circulation has increased 
a lot. Over the span of 20 years, it almost quadrupled. However, this increase isn't the 

 Central Banks and Monetary Policy 
Professor Ralf Meisenzahl 
 
42
whole story. If the Federal Reserve did not print paper currency, what did they do 
instead? The Federal Reserve does not buy government securities from the US 
Treasury directly but purchases them from banks. How did the FED pay these banks? 
Not with paper currency. Instead, they are paid with digital money. This takes the form 
of a credit, to the banks’ reserve accounts at the FED.  
 
 
The FED increased the amount of banks reserves in the system. As you can see, bank 
reserves at the Federal Reserve expanded to about 40% of liabilities by 2021. What's 
missing here? Most of the remaining liabilities belong to the US government general 
account about 20% at its peak. Why? Well, the US government had a bigger footprint 
after 2008 and especially in 2020. This resulted in more money being deposited at the 
Federal Reserve. The government used these deposits to pay for various fiscal 
programs.  
 

 Central Banks and Monetary Policy 
Professor Ralf Meisenzahl 
 
43
 
Let's wrap up. In this lecture, we have discussed the Federal Reserve balance sheets 
and its components. The key takeaways are first, the main asset held by the Federal 
Reserve is government securities. Second, the main liability is the monetary base. This 
consists of currency in circulation and bank reserves. Third, the size of the balance 
sheet went up by a factor of 10 between 2008 and 2020. At this time, the FED used its 
monetary policy tools to support the economy. It paid for this support by increasing the 
monetary base, particularly the amount of bank reserves in the financial system.  
 
 

 Central Banks and Monetary Policy 
Professor Ralf Meisenzahl 
 
44
Lesson 2-2.3. Open Market Operations  
 
Hello, and welcome to this class on open market operations. Open market operations 
are central to the monetary policy toolkit. If the Federal Reserve decides to increase 
interest rates, then this could be achieved using an open market operation. What is an 
open market operation? We will see that an open market operation involves the sale or 
purchase of securities by a central bank. We will also see how this works in practice. 
We will discuss how open market operations directly affect the quantity of reserves in 
the federal funds market. We will see how these open market operations determine the 
equilibrium interest rate in this market. The federal funds rate, remember, the federal 
funds rate is the main target interest rate of monetary policy in the US.  
 

 Central Banks and Monetary Policy 
Professor Ralf Meisenzahl 
 
45
 
Let's get started, monetary policy involves choosing a target interest rate. This target 
interest rate will hopefully have an impact on the economy. This will allow the Federal 
Reserve to achieve its goals. The target interest rate of the Federal Reserve is called 
the federal funds rate, this is a short-term interest rate. In fact, this is the interest rate in 
the interbank market. Remember, the US interbank market is called the federal funds 
market. All banks have reserve accounts at the central bank, these reserves are called 
federal funds. An open market operation is designed to influence the federal funds rate.  
 

 Central Banks and Monetary Policy 
Professor Ralf Meisenzahl 
 
46
 
Roughly speaking, how does this work? Well, the Federal Reserve does not change the 
interest rate directly. Instead, by conducting an open market operation, the fed changes 
the supply of reserves. The intersection of supply and demand determines the price of 
these reserves. That price is the same as the interest rate in this market, it is called the 
federal funds rate. Let's assume the Federal Reserve wants to decrease the interest 
rate. To achieve this, the Federal Reserve could shift the supply of reserves to the right. 
The new equilibrium features more federal funds, which will be traded at a lower interest 
rate.  
 

 Central Banks and Monetary Policy 
Professor Ralf Meisenzahl 
 
47
 
Open market operations allow the Federal Reserve to manipulate the quantity of 
reserves in the system. How does the Fed do this? Let's continue our example, say the 
Fed wants to increase bank reserves. They could do this by giving banks more reserves 
in exchange for some securities. The bank would already own these securities, and the 
Fed would have to pay a fair price. One more time, if the Federal Reserve wants to 
lower the federal funds rate, it can buy securities from banks. These purchases are paid 
for with reserves. Hence, the overall available funds in the federal funds market will 
increase. This shifts the supply curve to the right. The new equilibrium has more federal 
funds and a lower interest rate. Let's have a look how this works in practice, there are 
several steps.  
 

 Central Banks and Monetary Policy 
Professor Ralf Meisenzahl 
 
48
 
Step 1, the Federal Reserve's Open Market Committee, or FOMC, decides on the target 
interest rate. Step 2, by buying and selling itself, is relegated to the Federal Reserve 
Bank of New York. They manage the Federal Reserve system open market account, or 
SOMA. Step 3 the Federal Reserve Bank of New York's trading desk then purchases 
securities from the so-called primary dealers. These dealers have reserve accounts at 
the Federal Reserves. These dealers include the largest banks. What types of securities 
are usually purchased? Mostly US treasuries. Step 4, when the trading desk completes 
a purchase, the Federal Reserve's balance sheet expands. On the asset side, we add 
the purchased securities, and on the liability side, reserves increase. These are new 
reserves that the Federal Reserve creates. Remember, the Fed controls the monetary 
base, so it is free to create these reserves. Here's an example of an open market 
purchase made by the Federal Reserve.  
 

 Central Banks and Monetary Policy 
Professor Ralf Meisenzahl 
 
49
 
On July 19, 2021, the Fed bought us treasury securities with a par value of 1.4 billion. 
The securities had a remaining maturity of between 15 and 22 years.  
 
 
Here's a snapshot of the system's open market account portfolio from July 19th, 2021. 
These were the domestic security holdings of the Federal Reserve system. At this point 
in time, all the securities are US government debt or debt guaranteed by the US 
government. The portfolio increased by about 100 billion relatives to the prior week.  

 Central Banks and Monetary Policy 
Professor Ralf Meisenzahl 
 
50
 
 
The 2008 financial crisis marks a breakpoint in the way open market operations were 
conducted. The Fed reduced its target for the federal funds from five and a quarter 
percent in mid 2007 to a range of zero to a quarter percent in December 2008. With 
short term interest rates close to zero, simply buying more securities to increase 
reserves was no longer effective. New approaches were needed to stimulate a 
struggling economy. After the financial crisis, the aggregate supply of banked reserves 
was now larger than ever. This was a direct consequence of large-scale interventions 
by the Federal Reserve. This meant that open market operations would no longer be as 
effective in controlling the short-term interest rate. The Fed needed new monetary policy 
tools to deal with these problems. We will discuss these issues in a separate lecture.  
 

 Central Banks and Monetary Policy 
Professor Ralf Meisenzahl 
 
51
 
In this session, we have discussed open market operations and monetary policy. The 
key takeaways are first, open market operations affect the supply of reserves. This, in 
turn, determines the federal funds rate, the Federal Reserve's target interest rate. 
Second, before the 2008 financial crisis, open market operations were the main 
monetary policy tool. Third, after 2008, with the supply of reserve have been elevated, 
traditional open market operations have been less important. 
 
 

 Central Banks and Monetary Policy 
Professor Ralf Meisenzahl 
 
52
Lesson 2-2.4. The Discount Window  
 
Hello, and welcome to this lecture on the Federal Reserve's Discount window. We will 
discuss how the federal reserve uses the discount window to provide a variety of short-
term cash loans to banks. We will examine primary, secondary, and seasonal credit. We 
will see what these loans look like and understand why they exist. We will then draw a 
connection between the discount window lending and monetary policy, we will 
understand how the discount rate influences the federal reserve target interest rate. 
Okay, let's get started. Discount lending has long been a tradition in banking. The basic 
idea is that the lender first calculates the required amount of interest and fees. The 
lender then discounts this amount from the face value of the loan. The borrower gets 
the discounted loan today, this loan amount is already reduced upfront to account for 
interest and fees, but then the borrower must repay the full-face amount at maturity.  
 

 Central Banks and Monetary Policy 
Professor Ralf Meisenzahl 
 
53
 
Let's go through a quick example. You want to take out a discount loan with a face 
value of $100, the maturity of the loan is one year. Let's say the lender calculates a 
discount rate of 10%, this covers the interest on the loan and fees. The loan amount 
that you receive today is $90, this is the face value of $100 minus the $10 of interest 
and fees, but in a year, you will have to repay the full $100.  
 
Why is this type of loan useful? Well, the cost of a loan is accounted for upfront, this 

 Central Banks and Monetary Policy 
Professor Ralf Meisenzahl 
 
54
means only one payment is required rather than a series of monthly interest payments. 
For that reason, discount loans often help with short-term funding needs.  
 
 
Since 1913, the federal reserve has offered discount loans to banks. Why does the Fed 
do this? Well, the loans provide cash to banks on short notice, this ensures that there is 
enough cash in the banking system. In the extreme, this can prevent bank runs and 
banking panics. Discount loans were provided at a special window at each of the 
regional reserve banks called the discount window, hence the name discount window 
lending. Nowadays, the Fed provides short-term cash loans secured by eligible 
collateral, these are secured discount loans. However, the term discount window stuck, 
it is still used when the federal reserve lends directly to banks.  
 

 Central Banks and Monetary Policy 
Professor Ralf Meisenzahl 
 
55
 
At the federal reserve, banks currently have access to several types of discount loan 
lending. We will focus on primary credit; this is the most important category. The main 
purpose of primary credit is to provide cash in case other funding is not available. 
Primary credit discount loans are available to well-capitalized healthy banks. These are 
short-term loans with a maximum maturity of 90 days. The interest rate on primary 
credit loans is set relative to the target federal funds rate. This is usually higher than the 
interest rate on other forms of short-term credit, this incentivizes banks to borrow in the 
private cash markets. The Fed should be a last resort.  
 

 Central Banks and Monetary Policy 
Professor Ralf Meisenzahl 
 
56
 
These are secured loans. The federal reserve accepts a broad range of collateral, 
including commercial and industrial loans, consumer loans, residential and commercial 
real estate loans and US treasuries. Some of these types of collateral are riskier than 
others. To account for risk, the Fed applies margins indicating how much a bank can 
borrow against each type of collateral.  
 
Here's an example of a margin table, these margins are as a percentage of the market 

 Central Banks and Monetary Policy 
Professor Ralf Meisenzahl 
 
57
value. A US treasury with a remaining maturity of one year is very safe. A bank can 
borrow 99 cents on the dollar. In contrast, a loan for commercial real estate with a 
remaining maturity of one year is still rather risky.  
 
 
Banks can only borrow between 35% and 95% of the value of the loan.  
 
How is the discount window related to monetary policy? The discount window helps the 

 Central Banks and Monetary Policy 
Professor Ralf Meisenzahl 
 
58
federal reserve to control short-term interest rates in the economy, how does that work? 
Well, there are two things to keep in mind. First, a discount loan from the Fed or an 
interbank loan from another bank are close substitutes, both are short-term loans. Any 
healthy bank can access either the interbank market or the discount window. Second, 
recall that the discount rate is set near the upper bound of the federal fund target range. 
Now, what happens if the realized interest rate on the federal funds exceeds the 
discount rate? Well, it would be cheaper for a bank to borrow from the discount window. 
This shift in demand away from the interbank loans will put downward pressure on the 
federal funds rate. Hence, the discount rate enforces the upper bound of the federal 
funds target set by the central bank. It ensures the realized federal funds rate does not 
get too high.  
 
 
We can see this in the data. From 2003 onwards, the primary credit rate always sits 
above the federal funds rate.  
 

 Central Banks and Monetary Policy 
Professor Ralf Meisenzahl 
 
59
 
Let's sum up. In this session, we have discussed the federal reserve's discount window. 
This is an important part of the traditional monetary policy toolkit. What did we learn? 
First, discount window loans are short-term secured loans to banks. They help banks 
manage any short-term cash needs. Second, discount loans are a substitute to 
borrowing federal funds in the interbank market. As a result, the discount rate provides 
an upper limit for the federal funds rate. 
 
 

 Central Banks and Monetary Policy 
Professor Ralf Meisenzahl 
 
60
Lesson 2-3: Non-traditional Monetary Policy  
Lesson 2-3.1. Forward Guidance  
 
Hello, and welcome to this lecture on forward guidance. In this class, we will examine a 
new monetary policy tool, Forward Guidance. Forward Guidance allows the Federal 
Reserve to communicate future monetary policy intentions. This is communication about 
tomorrow's action rather than actions taken today. This communication can be about 
future inflation or economic growth. It often includes how the Fed plans on adjusting 
interest rates in the future. The goal is to influence market expectations and reduce 
uncertainty. We will discuss several examples of forward guidance. We will understand 
why the Fed uses forward guidance, how it influences financial conditions. Let's get 
started.  
 

 Central Banks and Monetary Policy 
Professor Ralf Meisenzahl 
 
61
 
Forward guidance is an unconventional monetary policy tool. Unconventional because it 
goes beyond the traditional conduct of monetary policy, traditional monetary policy 
operates on short-term interest rates. In practice, this means open market operations 
and discount window lending. Forward guidance is relatively new. It arrived in 2009 
when the federal funds rate was close to zero. At this point, targeting short term interest 
rates was no longer an option. To overcome this challenge, the Federal Open Market 
Committee, or FOMC, decided to communicate how it intended to adjust monetary 
policy in the future. The Fed tried to target long-term interest rates. Forward Guidance is 
the official FOMC communication. It may take the form of press releases, speeches, 
testimony of officials in Congress and so on. These are usually very carefully crafted 
statements to the public. The goal is to avoid confusion. Forward Guidance signals 
monetary policy intentions to the public. These can be actions over the coming months 
or years. These actions can depend on how the economy is evolving. The goal might be 
to move longer term interest rates. Forward Guidance can also reduce uncertainty.  
 

 Central Banks and Monetary Policy 
Professor Ralf Meisenzahl 
 
62
 
Let's first look at an early example of how the Fed communicates. Since 1994, the 
FOMC has issued statements announcing decisions from the most recent Monetary 
policy meeting. Before 2009, these statements were brief. Check out this statement 
from March 16, 2004. It consists of one sentence about the interest rate, one paragraph 
summarizing current economic conditions, and one paragraph of potential risks. The 
statement also indicates which FOMC members voted for an action and which 
members, if any, descended from it. Finally, notice the absence of any indication about 
future monetary policy actions.  
 

 Central Banks and Monetary Policy 
Professor Ralf Meisenzahl 
 
63
Now let's play Fat Watcher and compare this statement to the previous statement from 
January 28, 2004. In the second paragraph, the description of the economy slightly 
changed. In January, the expansion was risk, but in March, it was only an expansion at 
a solid pace. This indicates the growth rate, albeit still positive, has decreased. 
Similarly, the description of the labor market is less favorable. The last paragraph is the 
same, except for the insertion of that. These changes in language are watched closely 
by the public. What have they learned from comparing these two statements? Over the 
span of six weeks, the Federal Reserve has changed its opinion about the state of the 
economy. While the January statement was quite upbeat, the March statement is less 
so. What does this mean for monetary policy? Probably that the Federal Reserve will 
not increase interest rates at the next meeting. This is true. Even so no clear statement 
about future monetary policy is included.  
 

 Central Banks and Monetary Policy 
Professor Ralf Meisenzahl 
 
64
 
Now, let's look at a more recent FOMC statement. Here we can see explicit forward 
guidance. Here's a statement from March 18, 2009. At this point, the federal funds rate 
was close to zero.  
 
 
What does the FOMC say? The committee will maintain the target range for the federal 
funds rate at zero to a quarter percent and anticipates that economic conditions are 
likely to warrant exceptionally low levels of the federal funds rate for an extended 

 Central Banks and Monetary Policy 
Professor Ralf Meisenzahl 
 
65
period. This is Forward Guidance. The statement signals that the federal funds rate will 
be kept at an exceptionally low level, meaning zero for an extended period. The time 
frame is not exactly clear. How should the public interpret this? Well, financial market 
analysts would probably expect the federal funds rate to remain at zero for at least one 
year and possibly much longer.  
 
 
Now consider this statement from December 12th, 2012. At this point, the federal funds 
rate was still close to zero, but raising rates was a possibility. You will notice that this 
statement is much longer. The FMC explains more about the economy.  
 

 Central Banks and Monetary Policy 
Professor Ralf Meisenzahl 
 
66
 
They refer to specific sectors such as households and business investments. But here, 
the FMC does something new.  
 
 
In paragraph 5, it states that the committee decided to keep the target range for the 
federal funds rate at zero to 40%, and currently anticipates that this exceptionally low 
range for the federal funds rate will be appropriate, at least as long as the 
unemployment rate remains above 6.5%, inflation between one and years ahead is 

 Central Banks and Monetary Policy 
Professor Ralf Meisenzahl 
 
67
projected to be no more than half a percentage points above the committee's 2% longer 
run goal. And longer-term inflation expectations continue to be well anchored. This is 
quite a sentence.  
 
 
Let's unpack this. The FMC says that the target federal funds rate will remain at zero as 
long as, first, unemployment is above 6.5%. Second, expected inflation in one or two 
years is not above 2.5% and third, inflation expectations remain well anchored. This 
means that everyone still expects 2% inflation in the long run. In other words, the FMC 
would keep the interest rate low under these precise conditions. This type of forward 
guidance gives planning certainty. It clarifies what extended period means.  
 

 Central Banks and Monetary Policy 
Professor Ralf Meisenzahl 
 
68
 
The FMC also releases minutes from its rate setting meetings. These are word for word 
discussions in the meeting. They arrive three weeks after each meeting. The minutes 
give further insights about the policy related topics that were discussed, the views 
expressed by participants, risks and uncertainty about the outlook, and the reasons for 
the committee's decisions. Of course, financial market analysts come through these 
minutes to gain insights about future monetary policy. Since 2007, the FMC has also 
published its summary of economic projections. This comes out four times each year. 
The projections provide FMC participants assessments of future economic outcomes. 
This includes GDP, unemployment, inflation, and interest rates. These outcomes are 
considered over the medium and longer run. Each FMC participant provides an 
assessment. This allows the public to see a range of forecasts.  
 

 Central Banks and Monetary Policy 
Professor Ralf Meisenzahl 
 
69
 
Let's have a look at the summary of economic projections from March 17th, 2021. At the 
time the economy was reeling from the COVID-19 pandemic. Here's the chart for 
changes in real GDP. This is GDP growth accounting for inflation. You can see that the 
forecast for 2021 varies between 5% and 7.3% The difference in the short-term forecast 
reflects the uncertainty about the recovery. In the long run, the estimates of the 
participants are really close to each other. There's little disagreement about the long 
run.  
 

 Central Banks and Monetary Policy 
Professor Ralf Meisenzahl 
 
70
 
Also, from the March 2021 summary of economic projections, we have the so-called dot 
plots. This chart summarizes where the FMC thinks the federal funds rate will go. 
Financial analysts pay close attention to this forward guidance. At that point in time, 
interest rates were close to zero. The question was, how quickly would rates increase? 
In 2021, no participant expected an increase from zero. By 2022, four participants think 
that the economy will have recovered sufficiently to increase the federal funds rate at 
least once. By 2023, almost half of the participants see the federal funds rate 
increasing. In the longer run, participants expect the federal funds rate to be 2% and 
3%. Of course, these forecasts are subject to revisions. However, they provide valuable 
insights in the FMC participant thinking. Forward guidance of this kind allows for more 
planning certainty for financial markets participants.  
 

 Central Banks and Monetary Policy 
Professor Ralf Meisenzahl 
 
71
 
Let's wrap up. In this lesson, we introduced the concept of forward guidance and 
discussed several examples. Forward guidance is a monetary policy tool. It allows the 
Central Bank to signal how it expects the economy and therefore its monetary policy to 
evolve. The public, especially financial market participants, pay close attention. Routine 
forward guidance emerged in 2009 when short-term interest rates were very low. At the 
same time, the Federal Reserve introduced forward guidance to put pressure on long-
term interest rates.  
 
 

 Central Banks and Monetary Policy 
Professor Ralf Meisenzahl 
 
72
Lesson 2-3.2. Large-Scale Asset Purchases  
 
Hello, and welcome to this class on large-scale asset purchases, or LSAPs. LSAPs are 
often called quantitative easing or QE. They are a form of unconventional monetary 
policy designed to directly affect longer term interest rates. The Federal Reserve used 
this tool for the first time during the 2008 financial crisis. At that time, the Fed was trying 
to stimulate the economy, even so short-term interest rates were at zero. In this 
session, we will see how LSAPs work. We will look at how these programs were 
designed. We will see how they affected long-term interest rates and the broader effects 
for the economy.  
 

 Central Banks and Monetary Policy 
Professor Ralf Meisenzahl 
 
73
 
Let's get started. Traditional monetary policy acts only on short-term interest rates, 
typically the federal funds rate or the discount rate. When the Fed cuts the short-term 
interest rate, this can also reduce longer term interest rates. However, long-term rates 
move to a lesser extent. In late 2008, the US economy was entering a deep recession. 
The Federal Reserve wanted to stimulate the economy. However, the federal funds rate 
had already been cut to zero. New approaches to monetary policy were needed.  
 

 Central Banks and Monetary Policy 
Professor Ralf Meisenzahl 
 
74
How did the Central Bank respond to this challenge? The Federal Reserve began 
purchasing a large amount of longer-term bonds. These were the so-called QE 
programs. There were four programs altogether QE1, QE2, QE3 and Operation Twist. 
Why did the Fed do this? How do these purchases affect financial conditions? Well, 
these purchases acted like a large demand shock for long-term bonds. Excess demand 
increases prices. Higher prices mean lower bond yields. Remember, there's an inverse 
relationship between bond prices and bond yields. So, these purchases aim to reduce 
long-term bond yields directly. Lower long-term bond yields reduce borrowing costs for 
longer term investment horizons. This should kickstart investment and economic 
activity.  
 

 Central Banks and Monetary Policy 
Professor Ralf Meisenzahl 
 
75
 
Let's look at these programs in the context of QE1. We can see the scale of the 
program and understand if it was effective or not. QE1 was launched in November 2008 
and expanded in March 2009. By the time it ended in March 2010, the Fed had bought 
1.25 trillion in mortgage-backed securities, 175 billion in debt issued by GSEs, Fannie 
Mae and Freddie Mac and 300 billion in US Treasury securities. These purchases 
accounted for more than 20% of the market value at the time. This is a massive 
intervention by a Central Bank. Was the first round of quantitative easing successful? 
Let's look at long-term yields.  
 

 Central Banks and Monetary Policy 
Professor Ralf Meisenzahl 
 
76
 
First, long-term Treasuries. The chart shows the yield on 2-year Treasury securities. 
After the program was implemented, the yield dropped from 1.6% in late October 2008 
to 1% in April 2009. Let's look what happened to corporate bonds. These are BAA rated 
corporate bond yields. This is the borrowing cost for businesses with limited access to 
capital. As the chart shows, with the rollout of QE1, yields dropped from a peak of 9.5% 
to about 8%. This lowered the borrowing costs of corporations. We can also check the 
mortgage market. The Fed made a massive purchase of mortgage-backed securities, or 
MBS. There's a close relationship between MBS yields and the mortgage rate. When 
MBS yields fall, then usually the mortgage rate falls as well. You can see in the chart 
when the QE1 program started, the 30-year fixed mortgage rate started to fall from 
almost 6.5% in late October 2008 to 4.85% in early April 2009. This has a sizable effect. 
Lower mortgage rate encouraged the purchases of homes. This intervention may have 
helped to support the housing market. The other quantitative easing programs had a 
similar flavor. QE2 was announced in October 2010. QE3 in September 2012. 
Operation Twist involved the Federal Reserve selling short-term securities and using 
the proceeds to buy longer term securities. In each case, the intent was to push down 
longer-term interest rates. This reduces the cost of borrowing for households and firms. 
These programs stopped in October 2014. By this time, the labor market had recovered.  
 

 Central Banks and Monetary Policy 
Professor Ralf Meisenzahl 
 
77
 
The chart shows the impact of the QE programs on the Federal Reserve's balance 
sheet. Remember, these large-scale asset purchases ended up with the Fed.  
 
 
By 2014, the Federal Reserve held almost 4 trillion in securities. These were mostly, US 
Treasuries and MBS. This was a dramatic expansion in the balance sheet relative to the 
period before the 2008 financial crisis. Large scale asset purchases were also part of 
the Federal Reserve's response to the COVID-19 pandemic. In March 2020, the FOMC 

 Central Banks and Monetary Policy 
Professor Ralf Meisenzahl 
 
78
announced that the Federal Reserve will continue to purchase Treasury securities and 
agency mortgage-backed securities, in the amount needed to support smooth market 
functioning and effective transmission of monetary policy to broader financial conditions. 
This program was another open-ended commitment to support the economy.  
 
 
What have we learned in this class? First, when short-term interest rates are at 0%, the 
Federal Reserve can use large scale asset purchases, or QE, to conduct monetary 
policy. Second, large scale asset purchases can target longer term interest rates. Third, 
large scale asset purchases reduce the costs of credit for consumers and corporations 
by lowering long-term interest rates. 
 
 

 Central Banks and Monetary Policy 
Professor Ralf Meisenzahl 
 
79
Lesson 2-3.3. Monetary Policy With Abundant Bank Reserves  
  
Hello, and welcome to this class on monetary policy implementation when bank 
reserves are abundant. After 2008, and the large-scale asset purchase programs, the 
banking system was awash with reserves. This rendered traditional open market 
operations less effective for managing interest rates. In this class, we examine two new 
monetary policy tools created for this environment. First, interest on reserve balances, 
or IORB, and second, the Overnight Reverse Repurchase Agreement facility, or ON 
RRP. These tools help the Federal Reserve control short-term interest rates when there 
are high levels of bank reserves. Let's get started.  
 

 Central Banks and Monetary Policy 
Professor Ralf Meisenzahl 
 
80
 
How does the Federal Reserve target interest rates? Historically, the Federal Reserve 
would conduct open market operations. This involves buying and selling securities to 
change the level of supply of reserves in the federal funds market. The figure shows the 
federal funds market. By adjusting the supply of bank reserves, the Federal Reserve 
controls the federal funds rate.  
 
Then the 2008 financial crisis arrived. The federal funds rate was cut to zero, there were 

 Central Banks and Monetary Policy 
Professor Ralf Meisenzahl 
 
81
large-scale asset purchases. These purchases were funded by a drastic increase in 
bank reserves. Reserves had grown from 14 billion in 2007 to over 2.6 trillion in 2014.  
 
 
We have examined this chart in another lecture.  
 
We can see the impact on the equilibrium in the federal funds market. The supply of 
reserves is much larger, and the federal funds rate is zero.  

 Central Banks and Monetary Policy 
Professor Ralf Meisenzahl 
 
82
 
 
Why is this a problem? Eventually, the Federal Reserve would like to increase interest 
rates. However, the federal funds rate would no longer respond to small changes in 
bank reserves. Traditional open market operations would not be enough. Large 
changes in the supply of reserves were needed for the federal funds rate to respond. In 
theory, the Federal Reserve could reduce reserves through large-scale asset sales. 
Asset sales, not purchases. However, the fear was that this would be too costly. 
Unloading $1 trillion of securities could have a large unintended consequence for 
financial markets and borrowers. It was deemed too risky.  
 

 Central Banks and Monetary Policy 
Professor Ralf Meisenzahl 
 
83
 
Two alternatives were adopted instead. First, the Federal Reserve pays interest on 
reserve balances, or IORB. This tool targets banks. Second, the Federal Reserve 
created the overnight reverse repo facility, or ON RRP. The ON RRP targets non-banks, 
such as money market mutual funds. These non-banks are also active participants in 
cash markets, so they cannot be ignored. Together, these tools allow the Federal 
Reserve to control short-term interest rates, even when reserves are abundant.  
 

 Central Banks and Monetary Policy 
Professor Ralf Meisenzahl 
 
84
Let's see how this works. We will start with interest on reserve balances. The Federal 
Reserve now pays interest on reserve balances. These are funds that banks hold 
overnight in their account at the Fed. These funds are not lent out to other banks in the 
interbank market. How can this help with monetary policy implementation? Assume the 
Federal Reserve sets the interest on reserve balances equal to the target federal funds 
rate. Now, banks are indifferent between investing overnight with the Fed or making an 
interbank loan. We will earn the target federal funds rate, either way. This must be the 
case in the equilibrium. If the federal funds rate was higher than the IORB, then banks 
would lend out reserves in the interbank market. This arbitrage process should continue 
until the two interest rates equalize. In practice, the interest of reserves provides a lower 
bound on the federal funds rate.  
 

 Central Banks and Monetary Policy 
Professor Ralf Meisenzahl 
 
85
 
We can see this graphically. Here's the supply and demand in the federal funds market. 
By paying interest on reserve balances, this will put a floor on the federal funds rate. In 
equilibrium, no bank would be willing to accept less than the IORB by lending in the 
interbank market.  
 
 
This allows the Federal Reserve to increase the federal funds rate without changing the 
supply of reserves.  

 Central Banks and Monetary Policy 
Professor Ralf Meisenzahl 
 
86
 
 
What about the ON RRP facility? Why do we need it? How does it work? In the United 
States, non-banks play an important role in the cash markets. Money market funds, for 
example. Since these lenders cannot access the IORB, they might sometimes be willing 
to lend at a lower rate. This is better than accepting nothing on cash that is sitting idle. 
This means, short-term interest rates could dip below the IORB. To combat this effect, 
the Federal Reserve created the ON RRP facility. It is the equivalent of IROB for these 
non-banks. They can invest overnight with the Fed through a repurchase agreement. 
This facility ensures that the Fed can set a floor on the short-term interest rates. These 
non-banks are unwilling to lend for less than the ON RRP rate. Let's see this in action.  
 

 Central Banks and Monetary Policy 
Professor Ralf Meisenzahl 
 
87
 
Here's the chart showing the ON RRP rate along with the federal funds rate. As you can 
see, both rates track each other well. This means that the ON RRP can help the Federal 
Reserve to increase the federal funds rate. Remember, this was a time when there were 
massive amounts of bank reserves in the system. Under these conditions, a traditional 
open market operation would not have worked.  
 
Let's wrap up. This was a class on how central banks can implement monetary policy 

 Central Banks and Monetary Policy 
Professor Ralf Meisenzahl 
 
88
when the system is flooded with bank reserves. We covered two key ideas. First, when 
there are a lot of reserves, traditional monetary policy tools may fail to influence interest 
rates. Second, the Federal Reserve created new tools, IORB and ON RRP, to provide a 
lower bound for the federal funds rate.  
 
