109 day1 - YouTube
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=XPEIDrZMdm8

Transcript:
(00:02) tangles, but muted. They're kind of linked today only. Today only. Just don't say anything bad about me. Well, it's muted. Just make sure if you need me to talk, I'll use this for the room. Yeah. All right. Good. Testing, testing. Foo foo. Welcome, welcome, welcome students here and online.
(00:29) Welcome to CS1090A, AC209A, stat 109A and 109A for the extension school students. I going to be one of the two lecturers for today. My name is Pablo Protoabas. You can see there and along with Kevin who is going to take the second part of today the introduction and Chris who will be teaching this class. They're there.
(00:53) blame them for all the bad things. Uh so it's very exciting to see so many students. Uh that's always fun to see the first day of class. After the first day, I go home and I say, "Oh Jesus, now I have to make sure this class runs properly. So many students, but it's great to see so many of you here interested in this topic.
(01:18) " Just before we start, I want to make it clear, you're not going to be an expert in AI and data science with this course. Okay, nobody left yet. Good. Uh I see this as the beginning of a journey or somewhere in between your journey. There's many more things to learn after this. So what we're going to do in this course is to put the foundations.
(01:41) I know these days we all love to go and run some uh large language model and b coding and get things going. I old fashioned in that way. I want to learn the fundamentals. I want to understand them. And this class hopefully will teach you the fundamentals. Okay.
(02:05) So then we have in the spring another course which goes a little bit deeper and then there's other courses here and at the other vocational school down the road uh that you can take that's MIT uh that you can take to learn more stuff. Okay. So uh today's lecture or is not much about concepts. It's a little bit about introducing what is the course about introduce ourselves a little bit the pedagogy we're going to uh learn and some salience parts of the syllabus.
(02:35) Uh I think is you should all read the syllabus at one point. Uh actually you should read the syllabus because there's many details there. We're not going to be able to cover everything today but it's a good idea to read the syllabus to know the dead the dates of the homeworks of the of the midterms etc.
(02:56) and the policies but we're going to touch some of them but I strongly suggest to read the syllabus so you know what's the class all about I'm sure most of you have at least give me it's a little bit hot up there or yeah sorry uh or is it hotter day all right so let's start ready okay so let's look at the road map we're going to have today uh what is data science uh this is introduction to data science 109 maybe we should at least have an idea of what we're talking about because these terms change so much. They overloaded.
(03:29) People use data science, AI, now agentic flow, everybody's talking about something. They all kind of mean similar things, but at least we should have some idea what we're talking about. What is the course will be about then we're going to say why do you want to do that? And I'm ask some of you to tell me why you're in this class. And then finally we go to not finally then we go to how to learn and why take 109A.
(03:54) Sometimes you see I skip this zero because of habits. This slide sometimes I made before uh see change from 109 to 1090. Okay. Uh we're trying to change but you'll see some breadcrumbs. Uh what is this class? The who the how and the what. Uh and eventually at maybe a little demo if we have time. Okay. All right. So, let's start. What is data science? Um, it's a first class.
(04:24) You're still coming from uh summer either internships or vacation. So, I don't want to overload you with heavy stuff. So, what I want to talk about is what is data set. Let's look at it from historic perspective. Right? Um so so long time ago what we have is people before a civilization lying on the field looking up in the sky and what do they see? Stars. Okay.
(04:54) So you see a lot of stars and what do you do? You start counting stars, right? Not dollars, counting stars. That's a nobody got it. You got it. All right. So you count stars. At one point you start trying to find means and standard deviate. No, well maybe not that but you try to figure out how many stars are there in which part of the sky and that's kind of the birth of start counting and doing science in some ways right so I call this somehow the beginning of statistics right you take a part of the sky and you count the number of stars and then you
(05:31) multiply with all the parts of the sky however people they are not only lying down there uh looking at the sky Hey, what do they need to do? Anyone? You're a prehistoric person. Uh, and you're lying there, you're looking at the sky, you get excited, but there is some basic need. What is that? You need to eat, right? So, what did you say? Sleep. That's of course after you sleep. That's good. Actually, that's important.
(06:05) Uh, and some of you have to remember that. uh after you sleep the morning you have to eat and actually a lot of early statistics are based on crops counting crops trying to predict yield and all the things again it's again a form of statistics right it is a form of data science you have data you measure it and then you try to zoom and then you try to uh Sorry, we have as usual technical problem with the zoom.
(06:47) But you you do record it, Richard, right? Yeah. Okay. Um so I this is the second part that humans start doing statistics data science. You measure something and then you're trying to do some conclusions, some inference out of that. uh quickly. All right. All right. So, the story continues and people start become more sophisticated. You have Stonehedge there trying to calculate seasons and basically seasons and where the planets and stars are on the sky.
(07:27) And on the right is an interesting machine actually uh which actually it's a computer found in somewhere in the south of Greece in the bottom of the sea. Do we have any Greeks in the room besides me? Okay. What is that? You know no. Okay. Uh so it was found somewhere in the south of Greece. See it's actually a computer is with gears that calculates orbits. Okay. So you see the progression here. We start counting stars.
(07:53) Then we get needy to sleep and to count uh crop. And now we become more sophisticated start doing machines and the next thing we start I mean few centuries later and this is very important is that we start trying to understand the universe the world around us by thinking about first principles and we describe this first principle with equations. Okay.
(08:18) So we have there uh Kepler's equation, we have Schroinger's equation, Maxwell equations, Einstein's equation and Navier Stocks equation. I think I got them all right. Those are equations that describe pretty a lot of things. Fluids, uh quantum mechanics, gravity, electromagnetis. Okay.
(08:42) So there is a shift here between nons not sophisticated machines into actually going into first principles and start understanding the word. Hello there's people up there. For good it's strange. Is it more expensive those seats? Same price. No more expensive. All right. And there too. Oh my god. This heart of chips. the chipsets are there. Okay.
(09:14) So um so we have this shift of people start thinking about first principles and describing the work with equations and uh and then the next thing of course these equations turn out to be difficult to to compute analytically. Um for some reason mathematics have not been able to solve all these differential equations that this equations I was saying any mathematician in the room daring to raise their hand. Okay
(09:40) there. Okay. So for some reason mathematics has not been able to solve this differential equation we start doing computing. All right. So we have the birth of computing calculating solving these equations that I said before that describes the world around us the universe the cosmos with mach with computers. Okay. All right.
(10:00) Now we have all the elements for data science. We know how to collect data. We know how to describe the world with some first principal equations and we have computers. Now data science comes in and said forget the first principles let's just focus on the data. Not exactly but we kind of move away from the equations. We're trying to understand the world from the data mainly and less from the mathematics.
(10:26) So some of the students I have there the math math oriented define data science sometimes a little bit unsettling and I'm sure at one point sooner or later some of you will come and say why are we doing this way and we I'll say well it works. uh it bothers me too but first step let's learn how to do that and then we'll learn how to do more than that okay so what is data science is is an interdisciplinary field it comp it it contains it it comprise a lot of things it has math and of course statistics okay Kevin in a bit will be talking his take of view from the statistical point
(11:03) of view uh both Kevin and I uh we co we're going to be co-eing half and half uh Kevin come more from the statistics. I come from more science. Uh we pretty much agree on everything, but he is the real statistician. I'm the fake statistician. So, uh so we we need math. Of course, you didn't need math.
(11:25) Uh now, some of you already having an anxiety attack. Say, wait, I don't have much math knowledge. Uh am I going to be able to deal with this course? Uh the truth is that for this course, the math we're going to need are not so much. And if you do have gaps in your knowledge, don't be ashamed. It's not your fault. You don't know it. That's fine.
(11:46) It would be a shame not to seek help. I mean, seek uh advice and help through our amazing team of TFS and instructors. One great thing about Harvard is that we have a lot of resources or we used to have uh we have a lot of TFS and I think you should take advantage if you so happen to have some knowledge gap which I want to emphasize never fail feel ashamed that you don't know something it's not your fault you just don't know it would be a shame to go through a class and not learn that I strongly believe so if you say oh math I don't know much math Not don't panic. We can
(12:28) fix that gap. Okay. Uh then we include of course computer science. Again some of you say I never program in my life. That's a little bit more problematic. Uh because I can teach you math what we need in this class very quickly. But coding takes a little bit longer time. So if you have never coded in your life, you may find this course a little bit challenging.
(12:54) and I will talk to Chris or me or Kevin. Maybe it's better to take it next year. Now, if you have coding, you're just not proficient in Python, we can take care of that. Okay. Um All right. So, we include computer science and of course in order to do these things, you need to create to combine with domain expertise.
(13:15) Uh I can tell you a quick story because I am a true interdisciplinary person. I believe strongly in the discipline. I publish in many different fields. I'm truly interdisciplinary. But my first attempt in the interdisciplinary thing was not very successful. So I work in astronomy. I do research in astronomy.
(13:38) Anybody in astronomy here? No. Okay. So and I had a good friend who is a computer scientist. So we our kids were in the same daycare. So uh we start talking. So he said, "Yeah, I can I can do your problem. is not a problem. I gave it to them. A month later I went there. He said everything is solved. Cool. No, they solved the wrong problem.
(13:59) They don't understand the data. They didn't understand the domain. Everything was wrong. We have to start again. So the the discipline data science is not like car mechanic. You don't just take your car, give the key, and said fix my car.
(14:16) you stick around with the mechanic, which actually is a good idea anyways, and make sure you understand what he's doing into your car and learn what he's talking about, right? Uh so that's how it is. So we combine domain expertise with the rest, but you don't just go to the domain expert and say, "Give me your problem, I'll solve it for you." You must understand what is the domain at least up to a point.
(14:40) You not expected to be an expert in cosmology and general relativity overnight, but you should know what it means gravity. So I hope that idea is clear. All right. So uh data science and AI nowadays has tremendous potential. Uh you must have seen this and I know you're here not because of my charm and maybe Kevin charm uh but not because of my charm but because this is a lot of cool things happening and a lot of applications.
(15:06) She agrees with me. No, you should say no professor. Yes. So she she gets an A. Uh so uh a lot of applications are out there that excites us. Uh for example on the top left we have detecting malaria from blood smears. On the bottom we have discovering new drug combination using language models.
(15:31) Uh self-driving tracks for safe night shipping. Safe. Okay. And creating image for text problem. This is a Greek American med professor with glasses and beer. That was supposed to be me. Sometimes my TFS have weird sense of humor. Uh okay now much better okay that's uh all right so but it's also super important and I'm sure if we go for dinner or for a coffee and we start talking uh these topics will come up is AI going to take over is it going to take our jobs is it ethical is it it's very important and again your Harvard students here we have to think critically we have to question some things and I know one thing I know about
(16:21) Harvard students is they like to be challenged. They don't like to be confused with disorganization that I get and that's what we're going to be talking later. But you do like to be challenged and I get it. Uh but we need to be also critical thinkers, right? So I have got the last four days 10 students coming to me agonizing how to change their career because they've read that these jobs are disappearing and I said I don't think you should be living your life like that. You should not be reacting to every trend. There is a lot of going I
(16:55) mean okay now I'm going to play the dad for one sec to one minute. Okay there's a lot of going on nowadays. I don't envy your position to be honest with you. It is difficult to be at your age now. There is AI people saying the jobs are disappearing. You don't know what is real and what is fake.
(17:14) Uh political situations are weird, strange. Uh no opinions here. But there is a lot of tension, right? Uh so I get it. I really get it. I have two kids at your age. So I understand. But my simple advice is run your life by just becoming better. Don't for don't ignore the trends they are there but don't try to overoptimize because to things change so fast just learn the things very well become good at it and lead okay and I believe in you guys okay so we have to be a critical thinkers we have to think about these things AI is trained on data that we
(17:54) have shown them their bias we have to pay attention to that a lot of people do pay attention to it but you guys have to start thinking on the details of that all Right. So this is our idea what the data science process is. Again is this is Joe and Hans Peter I believe that they came with this thing when they started the data science course at Harvard and we adapted it because it's pretty cool.
(18:20) So what we talk about data science in our in this class is and I think this been adapted almost everywhere um is ask questions. That's very important. uh do not fall into here's my data, can you find something interesting? No, that's just not scientific, right? We need to be more scientific.
(18:47) You need to ask questions that there are kind of hypothesis, right? Does this work this way? Is this like that? Right? Um so we ask the questions then we how uh then we start getting the data. We ask question how are the data sample which data relevant? Are they privacy issues. Again, I'm going back to that. Oh, professor, I got the data. They were available.
(19:07) They said available doesn't mean it's okay to get them. You have to read the license that you're you're getting the data from, right? So, just be careful. Don't just get any data on the web. I think homework are we getting good data? It's legit. It's legit. Okay. We used to have a homework. Was it legit? Uh so then there is something called explore the data and this class is we pay a lot of attention.
(19:33) I think we have one or two at least two lectures is data exploration. Trust me on this uh I'm old enough to seen so many of that that a lot of attempts to do modeling without data exploration you're wasting your time because sometimes is so straightforward. Sometimes just put a filter. Less than that is this, more than that is that. Sometimes there's absolutely no signal.
(19:58) You're running three months of data and your data have absolutely junk. So do some data exploration and we're going to be doing some of that. Um model the data. That's where the gist is. That's where the fun is. That's where all like to do. We build the model. We fit the model. We validate the model.
(20:15) We spend a lot of time on that uh understanding these things. And then finally, data science is an interdisciplinary field. Interdisciplinary means you're talking to people that they don't know the exact terminology. So you have to learn how to tell the story. Okay? And I love telling stories. So for me, it's natural.
(20:34) So you have to tell your story, how you get there, what are the data, how you did that. And without using three I got this morning a project proposal with three jargon in the first title. I don't I hope the student didn't get offended but I told me rewrite. Okay. So, okay.
(20:54) This is um kind of what this data science why data science I have to I have to put some cool stuff. Uh this is another super cool that you change the style. uh and but if you decide to do it and I think you did decide to do this data science the question the my claim is that it's a lot of fun problem solving it's fun I mean I'm sure you're here because you love problem solving right and this is what we do we play we solve problems you'll be at the cutting ed uh and you make lots of money doing something you'll enjoy yes and it's not hard to start and do now what I'm saying is
(21:36) in principle All if you learn these things, you get decent jobs and you enjoy it. I think that's the secret of life. Doing something you like and you have I wouldn't say a lot of money but not lack of money. I do believe lack of money did brings unhappiness but money may not bring happiness. So at least you eliminate that.
(21:56) So I think that's pretty cool, right? So it's easy to learn. You do things you love and there's potential to get a good job. Yay. be a little bit excited. All right. So this is from I said you get a good job. You can see data science the average I think this is three years ago. It went up and it has good job satisfaction.
(22:22) Uh then this this is the best jobs in America. This is 2017. I keep this slide because I like this the hair of this guy. I think I have I think I have hair envy. So you can grow hair like that not me. Uh so and I want to do data science because and all this AI because I in B we do this. Can you talk because I don't want to be doing this forever. Welcome students here and there. I am your lecturer protoap.
(22:56) In this lecture we will cover generative models using neural networks. Who is that? But do we have Spanish speakers here? At least one. I can become s. I can do Italian. Yeah. Good. Right. Any Spanish speakers? Thank you. Thank you. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. All right. So, my goal is to do these things.
(23:46) So, then I switch my class online, put that view there, and I go do fun things. Uh all right. So, uh how do we learn data science? Learn by. So, there's many ways of learning these days. Um you can go and learn by reading. There's cool books out there. Uh there is very nice blogs. Uh one advice I'll give you again out of the scope of this class make it into a habit to read at least two three hours a week. Saturday, Sunday, just read. Read blogs, read books, read papers.
(24:17) Earlier you get into the habit to to read, the better you're going to become. I have seen this signal so clearly with my PhD students and graduate students. The ones they read, they excel better. So make it into a habit. Read read read. Okay, you there's other people they spend the effort to explain. So you do and read.
(24:38) Uh, of course there is things online. You can do videos and some cool things. You can see them on the PDF. Some of my favorite this guy here, I really like the way he explains things. Uh, and then now I'm going to finish and let Kevin take over. Um, yeah. What's wrong, Kevin? Too much time. Okay. Uh, but I'm going to leave you while he's setting up and getting ready with my deep philosophy in teaching.
(25:04) If I can summarize it with one thing is this movie. How many of you have seen seen this movie? All of you. Okay, cool. Is a wax on wax off. What do I mean by that? It means that the tendency is I am going to get two tutorials from open AI run my large language model make a bot and do a startup that's fine if you're successful good for you and keep remember remind you remember your professor that started that uh but I am all again I'm old fashion in certain things certain things I'm I'm very modern I said yesterday in class I even have a labu in my
(25:45) and sculpting whatever those things. So I'm up to date that I'm cool. I know the things. Uh but the certain things I'm oldfashioned. One is attending classes and Chris Kevin will explain. Second is that I really believe in understanding things. I don't believe in the dot fit pandemic. Dot fit means I get the model fit put the data and not understand.
(26:11) So I really strongly believe in understanding what is going on with my models, what's happening and why. So this movie kind ofized this. The kid wants to learn how to do karate and go and beat up the bullies. Cool. But he's making do the wax on and wax off.
(26:33) Learning the motions, right? And sometimes this class you will find it frustrating because it's going to be wax on, wax off. We're going to make you do train the model, validate it few times until you become very very comfortable with all the details on that. Um, yeah. All right. So, I'll play this while Kevin is taking over. Switching microphones. Uh, thank you very much.
(26:52) Um, we'll see you see more of it just quickly. So, today is the introduction. Next Monday, Crips. Today's Wednesday. Okay, next week, let me put next week is Kevin and Chris. So, you see all of us in full action and then the week after is back to me and then Kevin again. Okay, ready. I promise my part. You promise.
(27:31) I say you do. No question that you steel steel first wash all the car then wax wax remember deal no question. But we're on vacation. Yep. Yep. Yep. We're getting there. Thanks for bearing with us. This is going to be like the one time and probably the last lecture where you'll see both Pablos and I um in the same lecture. So, just give us a second to get all set up so that we're all good on
(28:43) DCE as well. Seeing double. I'm co-host. Thank you. Leave computer audio if you could. Oh, leave it. Leave it. Leave computer audio. Yep. Thank you. Mhm. You can see now forget how to minimize this. There you go. Perfect. I'm gonna call on you in a second. Yeah, you introduce yourself a little
(29:58) bit. Okay. And and same with you. All right. Welcome everybody. Howdy. I'm Kevin. Just to confirm what was mentioned. Here's the schedule of material we're going to get through this semester. It's going to be a tough time, but uh just next week you'll see nice and easy introduction to data and visualization. That's on me.
(30:20) Chris will do uh the class on Wednesday and then you see Pablo's takes over for doing lots of regression. I come in to do lots of classification and then we kind of split the rest as well. So, just giving you a heads up as to where the course is headed. But let's head over to the PowerPoint slides.
(30:42) And I want to make one uh little correction. If you're on Ed and it says Protopapus down here, he's got to share all credit with me. So now it says Protopapus and Raider. Big thing, big difference though, there was a typo that I corrected in the last few slides. So for those especially on DCE, I made a correction about like exams and stuff.
(31:03) So if you have the protopus raider, you have the most updated version. Just refresh your screen on ed. If you have protoapus, you have the old version. Not a big deal. Okay, we already talked a little bit about this, but now is sort of my time. We're going to talk about logistics unfortunately because I'm going to highlight what's important about this class. I'll hear some grumblings from all of you, I'm sure, and that's okay.
(31:31) Um, but as Pablo mentioned, engagement is key. We want you to be engaged in the class. We want you to come to class. We want you to ask questions in class. And we're going to try to encourage that as much as possible. First, Pablo's talked a little bit. I'm talking a little bit. The third key uh cornerstone to this class, Chris will introduce himself a little bit.
(31:54) So, Pablo, I don't know if you want to do a little introduction here of yourself. I'll go through the slides. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah, [Music] I don't know if you want to add it. Yeah, I don't know. You thought you were on vacation. I'm back from the dead from vacation. All right.
(32:21) So, I am the scientific director for data science CSC uh programs. Anybody who is in the data science or CSC principle, I'm your scientific director. So you can come and talk to me. Uh I you saw me teaching but I also do research. My lab is called stellar DNN. Uh because I do astronomy, machine learning, AI and statistics.
(32:48) Uh we work on data that comes from telescopes especially now we have super cool new telescopes coming up and also do a lot of work on applied math differential equations. So if you want to do thesis, please come and see me. Uh I love classical music. You if you go to the Boston Symphony Orchestra, sometimes you'll find me there. Come and say hi. No, don't be ashamed. Uh we do go with my wife almost 10 to 12 times a year.
(33:15) And if you anyone of you are playing music here at Harvard and you want to invite me, we do go I do go with my wife and listen to students. Okay. Uh I am also a cook. Uh when I was at the kind of a graduate student PhD at one point I got bored and the Lord blue had a school and I went and took six months of it and I got certified since then I switch a little bit more from cooking to eating but that's fine in principle I know.
(33:49) Uh and then funny facts about me. Uh after I after I finished high school, they forced me to go to the army. And uh I prove I have a proof official proof that I was the worst soldier in NATO because I was in the worst unit in the worst army in Neto. So by induction, I proved myself to be the worst. I was really bad. Thank god they kicked me out.
(34:16) And I think that's it, right? And I have a Tik Tok here. How often do you post? Once. One time. One post. And one was banned because I was using music I wasn't supposed to. Uh, all right. That's me, right? Yeah. Great. Thanks, Pablo. I'll do and then your third.
(34:42) So, I probably won't speak too much because I don't think this is being picked up by the um the videographer here. Just the room microphone. Oh, it's you, Kevin. Yeah, I'm next. I'm next. It's okay. It's okay. You can more important that Chris introduced himself me. But this is me, Kevin Ryder. There's a picture from a vacation a few weeks ago down in New Jersey.
(35:05) I had to take a selfie um uh for getting myself enrolled as a coach for uh Somerville youth soccer. I'll talk about that in a second. Um so, I had to take a quick selfie. I got a big smile on my face, nice and tan, sitting on the beach in New Jersey. And then Hurricane Aaron came by and kind of ruined the week, but that's okay.
(35:22) Uh, I am senior preceptor in the statistics department and the associate dus. Uh, my main role is teaching and education for undergraduates in the statistics department. Uh, and so I teach lots of classes, intro stat, this class, intro to bioatistics. I've done pretty much every single stat 100 class at some point. I've taught 110, 111, 139.
(35:46) List them out. I've taught them at some point. Been here for too long, if you will. Uh I do a lot of advising. My research interests are in the world of medicine. That's one of my domains. My other domain is in the world of sports. And then I've done other policy and type uh research as well.
(36:06) Mostly advising undergraduate research, doing senior thesis, things of that nature. Every once in a while we get publishers say more than every once in a while. Every two or three projects probably per year get published somewhere uh in mostly those domains. Outside of academia, I am Philadelphia through and through. So if my accent comes out every once in a while and I say would instead of water, I apologize, but hopefully you'll follow.
(36:30) Uh and I'm especially a big fan of sports teams from Philadelphia. Go Birds. That's right. We got one Birds fan. Uh I'm wearing green. Tomorrow is their first game. I don't actually have to teach tomorrow, so I got to show my passion today. Uh I have a passion myself for growing and cooking food similar to Pablo. We've bonded over this a little bit.
(36:56) Uh and you know, I try to provide as much food as possible to Pablo. He very much appreciates uh what I give him. He appreciates the lamb that we create. Uh I don't know the spicy food we uh share a love a little bit over too. So uh if you ever want to try some really really hot sauce, just ask. Uh and my fun fact is I am for the first time coaching girls fourth grade soccer.
(37:20) I have two daughters, a second grader and a fourth grader. Uh I have studied soccer analytics, done research in the world of soccer analytics. I've done research in the world of women's soccer analytics. And I'm trying to apply those techniques and ideas to fourth grade girl soccer unsuccessfully so far.
(37:37) So if you've ever heard of transfer learning or will learn at some point about transfer learning, it hasn't quite kicked in from professional women's soccer to fourth grade girls soccer. So I'm doing my best. We're 0 and1 so far. One game, one loss. I'm not on Tik Tok yet, so I need some convincing. Maybe someday I'll be a Tik Tok star.
(38:00) Chris, thanks. So, I'm a preceptor here at C's and I help mostly with classes related to the masters in data science and computational science and engineering courses. So, you'll see me in this first data science course. You'll see me in uh CS 1090B in the spring where we do neural networks.
(38:26) You may see me appear in Pablo's AC 215, the advanced practical data science course where they're deploying models at scale. I help out with high performance computing course and a mathematical modeling class that's also happening this semester as well. So that's what I do mostly is arrange some of the teaching materials, help coordinate our army of TFS that we have for this class. I think we've got about 30 TFS that'll be leading your sections.
(38:51) We're going to haveentent of office hours that we'll talk about later with the schedule. Um, so you won't see too much of me in the class presenting other than next Wednesday, but I'll be here. I'll have my own office hour and I'll definitely make myself available to everybody.
(39:09) You'll probably see me a lot on the ad discussion board as well, which I advise all of you to post all your questions there, but we'll talk more about that in a second. Yeah. So you'll see me making lots of ed posts and I'm a big fan of movies and what the first homework assignment will actually you'll learn about all the movie theaters that are local to uh Harvard and what's been playing there and what has played there historically. So hopefully people have fun with that homework assignment. So that's me.
(39:32) Okay. Don't let Chris underell himself. Chris is the man. He is the person, the go-to person for this course. If there's anybody you need to communicate with, he's your first person. You know, Pablo and I are just figureheads. You know, we don't know much about the course.
(39:56) Chris is your guy, but Pablo and I will try to chip in as much as possible. Chris also has much better hair. Like, let's be honest. As Chris mentioned, really your other go-to people will be from our gaggle, our huge collection course uh load of teaching fellows, about 30 of them. And I can't uh Whoops, skipped list two all of them off by name. There are 30. There's more coming hopefully presumably.
(40:26) Might be a couple more that trickle in, but they are really are going to be there to help you learn. So when you come to office hours, they will help you work through the problem sets. They will help you work through uh the concepts. They will be leading sections. So when we talk about concepts in class, we show you highlevel ideas. You need to put it into code, put it into practice.
(40:44) That's what section is for. So you will get to know at least three of your TFS very well and hopefully you'll get to know more than that. They will be uh key fundamental uh pieces for your learning in the class. We talked a little bit about this. Pablo's talked about what we're going to learn in data science.
(41:02) I can't focus on it enough or emphasize it enough. There are the five key steps to data science. We will talk and touch on each of these. Early on, we'll talk about data collection, where to get data, where it's available, uh how to clean it, how to wrangle it.
(41:22) We'll talk about how to manage data, how to access it quickly and reliably, whether that's through Python JSONs or data dictionaries. We'll do a little bit of exploratory data analysis. This is going to be really early on. That's going to be my first key piece on Monday talking about doing EDA as it's often um uh labeled.
(41:43) And then we'll spend a lot of time on building prediction models, doing statistical learning, doing statistical analyses, and that's the fun part. That's where you get to tune and play around with what model you think will work best to describe what's going on. And what's most important that I feel is the communication of your results. So you can fit the fanciest model ever and if you're not able to communicate what that model's telling you, you're not going to have a very powerful model in practice.
(42:09) Goals for the course, you know, we're going to push the key concepts though that intuition underlying the models. We'll push the math a little bit that underlies those models, but really it's going to be the concepts both statistically and machine learning for those models. We're going to focus on extracting insights in the domain from those analyses. You're going to do some implementation.
(42:34) An equal piece is implementing that with code. We'll use a lot of Python dictionaries uh Python libraries I should say uh to do help us with a lot of those different uh machine learning and statistical learning models. Uh we'll have some online sources as well and we'll learn how to handle all kinds of different types of data including scraping the web.
(42:57) And then what's really important is the impact and we'll talk about uh actually solving real life problems and thinking about the ethical and social impacts of our results. Um, so that will always be part of the communication as well. Sorry, my clicker lost its battery. Uh, details. I showed that schedule already. The first two weeks, we're going to talk about data, how to get it, where it comes from, uh, and thinking about visualizing and exploring some simple listic results from it.
(43:26) Before we do any modeling, you need to understand your data. And then we'll get into the modeling itself. Every single statistical modeling pro uh class probably starts with linear regression. We're kind of starting as the fundamental learning tool linear regression along with some other uh nonparametric models like KN&N to start.
(43:45) Uh we'll build up all the details of linear regression, multiple regression, doing uh regularization in linear regression, doing inferences, that's my key co uh contribution to the class, doing statistical inferences in that realm as well. will expand on that inferential approach and this is new this year bringing in some Beijian uh paradigm into the class that was usually saved for the second semester now we're introducing it in the first semester a little bit and then we'll go from regression in the world of data science and machine learning regression just means you're essentially
(44:21) predicting a numerical outcome and then we'll switch over to classification where we're trying to predict a classif uh a categorical outcome And so we'll build the same rough structure in the classification paradigm. And halfway through that big date to have on your calendars is that first midterm. So that first midterm is about eight weeks from now or seven weeks from now.
(44:47) It's going to be just before Halloween. Hooray. You can enjoy the holiday from this class. Uh and it will cover everything before that. So it'll include some pieces of the first week of those classification ideas. Okay? just as a heads up of where we're headed.
(45:06) There'll be three pet sets due before that midterm and two more pet sets after that. Two more homeworks after that. After the midterm, we'll talk about other little data issues, talking about missingness. Again, my key contribution in the class, talk a little bit about causal inf uh causal inference, talk a little bit of biases, and then the last four weeks are improved prediction models, tree-based models, random forest, things of that nature. Okay, my favorite machine learning model, random force models.
(45:31) Why? Because they work well. So if you want to fit and tune a model really quickly, random force is the way to go. If you want a more important, appropriate, better prediction model, there's other ways to go. Deep learning boosting models tend to uh work as well.
(45:50) After this course, after you learn all those fundamentals in those 14 weeks, you're probably going to want to take uh other courses in the future. One might be 109B. I be involved news to Pablo in 109B as well. Uh in the spring semester there they'll spend more than half of the course on neural nets.
(46:09) The other half of the course will talk a little bit about data issues including dealing with big data from the start doing some de uh dimension reduction doing some uh unsupervised learning. So this class if you know the two big umbrellas will be focused on supervised learning and then as a third semester if you want to continue your other class right Pavlo's other class AC215 sort of putting data science models into production and incorporating a lot of uh other AI entities into that idea.
(46:40) Okay. So if you're here for at least two more semesters after this one, I highly encourage you to consider both of those courses. Other courses that are related, you know, there's the intro CS classes. You can take them a lot of these concurrently with this class or you can take them after this class.
(46:56) I push all of our data science concentrators in the stats program uh to take CS 171 visualizing data in an interactive way. I think it's a fantastic course along with other more modeling type courses. machine learning, AI, and NLP. There's all the different stack courses. I could go on and on about my love for all these different stack courses I've taught or know about.
(47:19) So, if you have questions on those, feel free to reach out to me, come talk to me about all the other options. Hopefully, you come into this course having taken some sort of stack class. And then there are the upper level CS courses, the 200 level CS courses if you want to get more into the rigor and deep understanding of the models.
(47:37) Okay. Just giving you a heads up of where you can head after this class. But I want to hear from all of you. Why are you here? Think about that for a minute. Why are you sitting in class at 11:20 on a what is it? Wednesday now. My week's all messed up with the holiday.
(48:01) Why did you decide to be here? I'll tell you why I'm here, but why are you here? Have you thought about that question? Is it just to fulfill a requirement? Is it to get a better understanding of data science to become a data scientist? I think it's an important question to ask yourself every class you go to. Why am I signing up for this class? What am I hoping to get out of this class? Well, why am I here? I'm here to provide that statistical perspective on data science.
(48:32) Pavlos is going to push you, the CS department's going to push you to do machine learning, optimizing some outcome. I'm getting a better model, a stronger model because my R squared is better, because my MSE is smaller, because my mclassification rate, my F1 score have improved. But I'm here to say I don't care about any of that. I don't care how accurate your model is. It could still be trash.
(48:57) Why? Because the relationships you get are more important. My model, my simple linear regression model will show the relationships I care about. I can put it into practice in a different setting more easily because the model is more simplistic and I can express the true relationships there.
(49:15) I'm going to push you to consistently think about relationships between variables and how those relationships might be different for different people, different individuals. I'm going to push you to think about the uncertainty in your results. You get a wonderful prediction model, but what about the uncertainty? How often will that point prediction you just created for every single individual, what's the bounds of uncertainty on it? If I do a forecast in the future, what can go wrong in that forecast when the data situation changes? And we'll push in this class and I'll push you even more to think about data
(49:50) issues. What were the biases in creating or using the data? What were the ethical considerations? Should I even use this model and talk about the results of this model? Am I uh causing more trouble, more harm than good? Questions so far about the course? Anything you're worried about? It's hard to speak up in a big lecture hall like this. I understand.
(50:19) But we hope going forward you'll start to do that. We do have a question. Great. So I just want to ask for all those slides are we going to like have it before the lecture generally for all those slides we're going to have in the four lecture generally yes you know this is we wanted to be a surprise we wanted everybody to be paying attention but yeah we will it it was there I don't know if we released it actually until earlier today so yeah yeah yeah so generally speaking we'll release it and there will be readings involved with every lecture uh before the class actually meets
(50:51) also for the discussion section is start this week and no matter what time it is it start like I don't know there's a section right after so it starts right after yeah we have section this week there section this week all sections the the first section of any week it takes place after the Wednesday class so there were we didn't miss any sections because of the holiday yeah if we want to switch or something I would say you can you can still do that on my Harvard because we're in that period I believe you have the ability to
(51:23) actually change. Yeah, you are able to switch your sections if you want. If the section if the section is closed, it means it's at capacity. So, it's no just because because the capacity is in the rooms. Thank you. Yes, you are able to switch sections for those local students.
(51:42) If you want to switch sections, uh try to do it through my harbor right now during this ad drop period. It's just the easiest way because there's too many things for us to process right now. When will office hours be announced? Office hours will be announced. I can do it right now. I can I can make a Google calendar available through Canvas. It'll be embedded there. Um, we have so many office hours.
(52:03) So, I'm sure you'll find something. I'll get on that. I was about to talk about office hours. Other questions? All right. Let me continue on through the slides. So, course components. This might answer some of those logistic questions you have. You made it to lecture. Fantastic. That's the most pressing uh not important but pressing uh course component at this point because you're here. Uh this generally from a pedagogical perspective is where we'll introduce the material.
(52:34) You'll do some pre-ereading optional. You're not going to be tested on it, but we highly encourage you do that reading from the textbook or other sources to sort of uh introduce and motivate what's going to be taught in class. It will mostly be slides, but on occasion we'll have some coding exercises.
(52:52) We'll show you examples. We'll show you output. Go through some of the coding for you, too. Um, especially next week when we're first trying to get used to uh working with Python. All the lectures will be videotaped and recorded and posted on Canvas. Thank you DCE for doing all that work for us. Uh and you're here in the right place.
(53:12) Okay, so low lecture hall from here on out seems to be the place to be. We talked a little bit about the format. So hopefully you will do some pre-ereading. There might be some uh self-check questions, a quiz if you will, um to sort of reiterate that from that reading. should be the key learning goals from the reading.
(53:38) Then you come to class have with your questions, post them on ed come to class itself with your questions and we can engage together try to answer those questions and then like today live lecture we'll have slides prepared uh typically will be posted the night before the day before so that if you want to read through them real quickly you can but those slides are not all-encompassing.
(53:55) You will have to come to class to understand what we're doing through that. And then afterwards we will often have optional coding exercises as well to put the what's shown in class uh into practice. Okay? And then rinse and repeat. Start for the next lecture either Monday or Wednesday. Do the same thing. Little bit of reading for the next class. Should only take you half an hour to an hour at most.
(54:16) And then come to class motivated, ready to go, learn the material in depth and then put it into practice with another exercise. The other key component to the class, required component of the class are sections. These are required just like lecture is uh sections really is now replacing what we used to have as Friday labs.
(54:36) But Friday labs people don't like to go to class on Fridays a lot of times. So now we have sections which could be you signed up for either a Wednesday, Thursday or Friday section and you're required to go to your section. Okay? You don't have to go every single time. I'll talk about those mandatory policies in a second, but section is where you're going to put this stuff in practice.
(54:54) Here's a quick review over the last week of lecture. And then here's some exercises to put that into practice. Mostly coding, but some paper and pencil ideas too. Section attendance is required as I mentioned. Quizzes and mid midterm also importantly will be administered in section. I'll get back to those uh grade components in a section.
(55:14) In a second, not in a section. And then th for those of you who are on DCE uh quizzes midterm time things will be administered through proctoal more more details on that to come and you are assigned to a specific section you should go to your specific section if you want that full section schedule eventually we'll have it on canvas but for now as Chris mentioned go through the registar and look through the list of section times pick your best one if you want to switch you have to do that now all right Attendance in this class is
(55:48) required. I am the person who has to give the bad news. Uh it's really going to help you understand and we think it's important uh for us to get to know you to build foster that learning environment as best as possible. It's really valuable especially in a class where you can easily get lost in the weeds. What you can say is we love our memes here. You survived your first day back in school.
(56:14) For those of you who are returning from the syllabus, there are some details. Attendance is required for all onampus students, no matter what school you're coming through from. And essentially, it leads to you need a minimum amount of attendance in both lecture and section combined in order to make it to be qualified for a particular letter grade.
(56:40) So, I am the bearer of bad news of gloom. So essentially what this means, here's sort of the breakdown from the syllabus. If you want to get an A in the class, you got to come to twothirds of your lectures and sections. It's not a a hard ask. Come to twothirds of the lectures and sections and you're good.
(56:58) That could be all of the lectures and no sections other than when you have a midterm or quiz. You're good. You get can you're qualified for an A. You can come to all of your sections and only half of the lectures. You're good. You can qualify for an A. Okay? So, make sure you come to 2/3. We've brought that down, rounded down that number to 66%.
(57:17) Uh, to allow for you to get that A, a little less for a minus, a little less for B+, and to get a B in the class, you can just skip all of your sections and lectures that you want. I think everybody here is hoping to get something higher than a B. Okay, that just makes it attainable. It doesn't guarantee you're going to get an A if you come to twothirds of the class.
(57:36) the grading components still come into play, but it just qualifies you. You have to reach that bar in order to make the A bar to get a to be able to potentially earn that A in the end. If you need to switch out of this class, feel free afterwards, but we hope you don't. All lectures will be videotaped, so for those that you miss, you can catch up on them.
(58:00) Sections will not be videotaped other than for the online students. For every four sessions you attend, lecture or section, you will earn a late day. All right? And so if you come to twothirds of sections and lectures, that's roughly 24 appearances, you get six late days. Okay? So if you come to all 36 of our lectures and attend uh sections, then you can get up to nine late days.
(58:21) You can use up to two per assignment. And there's only five homeworks, not including homework zero. You got to earn you got to earn those late days. and DC students will all get four late days because we can't keep track of their attendance. They can't come here on time, unfortunately. And then the last component is office hours.
(58:38) Office hours is where you're will engage and ask your questions most often. They're going to be posted uh right away presumably. So that we have office hours later this week if you're working on pet zero and the beginning of next week. That calendar should be on Canvas now. And in fact, they should be on Canvas now. So I can update the slides.
(58:56) Um that's that Google calendar that has all the different uh office hours posted for you. Uh so make sure uh office hours are key when you're working on the problem sets and you have questions and you need real time uh help or real-time advice or have conceptual questions come to office hours. The first office hour is right after class right here.
(59:15) So if you have questions about the course, about problem set, stick around for the next hour. We have this room reserved I think till 1. Y till one. So I and hopefully a few other teaching staff members will stick around. Course assignments, there's five big key components. The first are those homeworks, those problem sets.
(59:39) Homework zero is due when Tuesday at 10 p.m. Make sure you hand that in. Homeworks one through five are the remaining of that 30% uh contribution. Other than homework zero, you can work around all these assignments in pairs. Help each other out. It's not a divide and conquer situation. You are responsible for the entire problem set assignment. You will submit as a pair though.
(1:00:04) Section quizzes. This is new in the class. There will be two different quizzes, if you will, that are worth 5% each of the component. It's just a quick concept review, multiple choice, a few short answer questions, 30 minutes long in section.
(1:00:22) I don't remember the date of the first one, but it's towards the end of the month, September 20 something. There you go. September 28th, October 2nd. It's on the list. And then quiz 2 is a little before Thanksgiving. All right. You'll be allowed some reference notes for that. And then the midterm is 18%. It is cumulative up to that point.
(1:00:40) Uh like I mentioned, it's that week in October 22nd roughly. You're going to be taking it in section. Uh you'll be allowed reference notes and there will also be a coding component that will be sort of a take-home portion that you'll do outside of class. Okay. 75 minutes conceptual questions, a lot of multiple choice with some short answer.
(1:01:01) Final exam essentially has the same format. concept questions, multiple choice, short answer, and it will also have a coding uh portion, but it will all be contained with a three within one of those three-hour seated exams that Harvard so much loves and is pushing these days.
(1:01:19) So, about a little more than half will be conceptual questions, a little less than half will be the coding portion. And then the last piece, the most fun piece of the class are going through your projects. And projects are completely o open-ended applied data science project and you can propose your own topic or we will have other topics uh proposed for you that you can select upon.
(1:01:44) It's a group project presumably somewhere between three and five students in each group and if you look in the syllabus the 209 students have a slightly different requirements than the 109 students but you can all work together. Okay, more details. There will be milestones along the way.
(1:02:03) The details for the project will come out uh probably in about two or three weeks. The five homeworks here are the topics. Homework zero, like I said, is due Tuesday night, 10 p.m. Homework one will be released around that time, due two weeks later. Doing some scraping, then getting into modeling, etc., etc., etc. Don't need to go through all these details. And there is that final group project three to five students per group.
(1:02:26) Project proposals are going to start look for it in late September. All the details will be released uh a week or two before that. Okay. So more details to come on the project. Homeworks like I mentioned uh work in pairs for homeworks one through five and they are due roughly every other Tuesday at 10 p.m.
(1:02:49) So the sort of schedule of homeworks, homework zero is due on Tuesday, September 9th. Homework one will be released on Tuesday and due two weeks later, September 23rd. Homework two will be released that day and due two weeks later. And so the semester will go on. Of course, midterms will break things up, stuff like that. So just be aware. Roughly every two weeks you have a new homework due.
(1:03:08) Late submission already talked a little bit about, but after those 48 hours, we need to start grading so that we can get you those grades back in a timely fashion. So we won't accept anything after that 48 hour period. Okay, a little bit more about details. I got about six more minutes to get through everything in this class.
(1:03:27) You're going to probably want some help. Best way to do that is to a ask questions on ed on the discussion forum. Hopefully, you can all help each other out and of course we will chime in as well as a teaching staff. You can come to office hours.
(1:03:45) That's the most immediate feedback you can get, immediate help you can get. And then if you have more administrative questions, we have a helpline Gmail account. So if you have questions about details after this week, you need to switch sections because your schedule changed, that's where you email the helpline as an example. And if you have more personal issues, just email Pablo and me.
(1:04:03) Okay? We'll probably include Chris into that. You can add Chris to that, too. Uh, and of course, we all try to tone down our work on the weekends. We all have families. Pablo and I have kids and so the weekends are a little bit tougher. What's that? Well, out of the house, but you still have kids. Come on.
(1:04:22) You don't give up that child support after they go to college. Uh, and we are very cranky at times. So, just be aware your professors have a lot going on in their lives. So, you know, nicely worded, helped by uh your large language models emails are very much appreciated. two main sources of all the material in the course really is Ed through ED.
(1:04:52) Hopefully you found these lecture notes in the lessons on ed and then also the discussion board is there. Uh you'll find the lecture slides, you'll find the reading assignments in those lessons. There will also be the section material posted there and those coding exercises will be posted under the lessons on ed and of course also the discussion board. Okay.
(1:05:11) All of the more assignments that you have to hand in, things of that nature will be posted on Canvas. All right. And so you have to work through Canvas to find all the administrative details, finding schedules, things of that nature. Sometimes those will also be posted on Ed, but Canvas is for the more official things other than the lecture material and section material. Okay? And that's where grades will be posted.
(1:05:37) Lots of questions from students. Can I audit this course? Yes, we allow that. Just look at the syllabus. If you audit the course, you're not allowed to take it for grade later. We have rules for that. Can you take this class asynchronously? Well, not really. All right. Because we have those attendance guidelines.
(1:05:55) You could take it and get a B if you wanted. College students aren't allowed at all to do it. And graduate students, you might be allowed depending on what school you're coming from. But realize you still need to make those thresholds for those grades. Are you prepared for this class? What are the prerexs in this class? What do you need to know coming in? Three big key fundamental ideas. You need to know a little bit about Python coding.
(1:06:22) You need to know a little bit about math and calculus. And you need to know a little bit about stats and probability. All right. A little bit means essentially if you took CS50 and are willing to learn Python details, you're good on the Python slide. Or if you take CS32, you're definitely good. Basic math and calculus. If you've finished 1B, you're in good shape for the math in this class.
(1:06:47) If you're willing to push yourself a little bit to learn a few details from 21A and 21B, every once in a while, a little linear algebra might creep in. We're not going to test you on it. And multivariable calculus might creep in. We're not going to test you on it. And then basic stats and probability. If you took stat 104 with me, you're in great shape.
(1:07:03) If you took stat 110 with Joe, you're in okay shape, okay, to take this class. No, no, I'm I'm being serious because stat 110 is a math class. Stat 110 is not a stat class. It's mislabeled that way. In my opinion, it's a wonderful class, but it's by itself, you never touch data. You know, you don't know what how to actually analyze data.
(1:07:23) And if you don't have that coming into this class, you might be at a little bit of a disadvantage. But no, you're fine. If you took stat 110, you're probably in good shape. Okay, homework zero does give you that sense of whether or not you've met those prerexs. So, if you're really struggling on all three facets of those in homework zero, you're in trouble.
(1:07:44) If you're struggling on one, you'll probably be okay. If you miss your class, will it affect your grade if you miss a single class? No. Doesn't matter. You can watch the videos. If you miss a third of the classes, no, it doesn't matter. You can watch the videos. Just make sure you come to the majority of class.
(1:08:03) Okay? It gives you a lot of freedom to miss class. But the best way to learn at college is to go to class and be engaged. You have a trip planned for the midterm. Can I take the midterm earlier or later? Well, make sure that you realize midterms are being administered in section that week. And our final exam is on December 11th as currently scheduled. It's early in the exam period.
(1:08:28) So that's great for you if you want to travel out earlier and you have no other exams. It's a little tough because that back end of the semester is going to be really loaded for us. Okay? Just be aware. So our exam is on the 11th. Can you make up an exam? Email us right away if you want to reschedule that midterm for a different section. That's fine.
(1:08:45) It's just we need to know right away. If you miss the exam, you got to go through the whole process with Harvard. Okay? We can't administer missed exams, final exams. DCE, as I mentioned, will be proctored via proctoo. Put those in your calendar. If you have a project in mind, that's great. Just be aware that if you know individual projects, you got to work in a group. So, you got to share your data.
(1:09:12) The data has to be uh sharable, can't be private, and should be public. And that's essentially it. All right, let's end this class with a little game. Who wants to be a data scientist? I need a volunteer to play the game. Secret word. Oh, yeah. Secret word. Secret word. Secret word. It doesn't have to be one word. So, how about go birds. Go birds. Yeah. Together. Go birds. G O B I R Ds. Go Birds.
(1:09:39) What does go birds mean? No one knows. No one cares. Philadelphia Eagles. That's the little bonus. Yeah, we went to Philadelphia. So, you can find where to put this secret on head under the lessons. Right above where you're looking at the slides, there's another little Actually, Kevin, are you able to Yeah, I'm going to try to show it.
(1:10:04) If you go to Ed somewhere on here, I think I had Ed. Maybe not yet. If you go to ED, it might take a second here. I guess we're not gonna Oh, well, we still have a few minutes for data scientists playing. Yeah, I just noticed. Yeah. Yeah, that clock's throwing me off. It says 44. Come on, Ed. Nope. Doesn't want to open up. There's too many of you on Ed right now. There we go.
(1:10:38) Oh, is that attendance? Yep. So, this might not be updated. Hold on. This how to what? Yeah. Yeah, I will. I will. I will. It's just Ed's taking forever. I have too much going on on my computer. All right. So, you click on Ed from Canvas. It takes you to the home our launching page for Ed.
(1:11:03) It should take you straight to the discussion board for CS 109A. I also have 104 and 116 for other semesters, 104 this semester. And then once you're here, you know, we don't have much in the way of discussion yet. However, if you click on this little book reader lessons, that's where you'll see I we have I have access to a lot of other stuff, but you'll see the lectures and section material posted here.
(1:11:38) All right, you click on lecture one because that's all we have so far officially given to you and here you will find the slides and then if you click over here on attendance, it's a little quiz for attendance credit. Go. If my fat fingers agree with me, the optional exclamation point. Go birds. Go birds. All right. Click submit so that you get credit for coming to class today. Okay.
(1:12:10) If you're texting it to your friends, that's an honor code violation. Make sure you get that submitted within the next two minutes as well. DCE does not need to do this. DC, there is no attendance record. We're out of time. out of time. We'll play a game maybe start of next next class. If you have questions, stick around. Thanks everyone. Hope to see you on Monday. Have a great weekend. work on pie at zero.